"Between Us Now" Between us now and here Two thrown together Who are not wont to wear Life's flushest feather Who see the scenes slide past, The daytimes dimming fast, Let there be truth at last, Even if despair. So thoroughly and long Have you now known me, So real in faith and strong Have I now shown me, That nothing needs disguise Further in any wise, Or asks or justifies A guarded tongue.

Face unto face, then, say, Eyes mine own meeting, Is your heart far away, Or with mine beating? When false things are brought low, And swift things have grown slow, Feigning like froth shall go, Faith be for aye. Thomas Hardy

2

"How Great My Grief" (Triolet) How great my grief, my joys how few, Since first it was my fate to know thee! - Have the slow years not brought to view How great my grief, my joys how few, Nor memory shaped old times anew, Nor loving-kindness helped to show thee How great my grief, my joys how few, Since first it was my fate to know thee? Thomas Hardy

3

"I Have Lived With Shades" I I have lived with shades so long, And talked to them so oft, Since forth from cot and croft I went mankind among, That sometimes they In their dim style Will pause awhile To hear my say; II And take me by the hand, And lead me through their rooms In the To-be, where Dooms Half-wove and shapeless stand: And show from there The dwindled dust And rot and rust Of things that were. III "Now turn," spake they to me One day: "Look whence we came, And signify his name Who gazes thence at thee." --"Nor name nor race Know I, or can," I said, "Of man So commonplace. IV "He moves me not at all; I note no ray or jot Of rareness in his lot, Or star exceptional. Into the dim Dead throngs around He'll sink, nor sound Be left of him." V "Yet," said they, "his frail speech, Hath accents pitched like thine Thy mould and his define A likeness each to each But go! Deep pain Alas, would be

4

"O memory, where is now my youth, Who used to say that life was truth?" "I saw him in a crumbled cot Beneath a tottering tree; That he as phantom lingers there Is only known to me."

His name to thee, And told in vain!"

"O Memory, where is now my joy, Who lived with me in sweet employ?" "I saw him in gaunt gardens lone, Where laughter used to be; That he as phantom wanders there Is known to none but me."

"O Memory, where is now my hope, Who charged with deeds my skill and scope?" "I saw her in a tomb of tomes, Where dreams are wont to be; That she as spectre haunteth there Is only known to me."

"O Memory, where is now my faith, One time a champion, now a wraith?" "I saw her in a ravaged aisle, Bowed down on bended knee; That her poor ghost outflickers there Is known to none but me." "O Memory, where is now my love, That rayed me as a god above?"

"I saw him by an ageing shape Where beauty used to be; That his fond phantom lingers there Is only known to me." Thomas Hardy

5

"I Need Not Go" I need not go Through sleet and snow To where I know She waits for me; She will wait me there Till I find it fair, And have time to spare From company. When I've overgot The world somewhat, When things cost not Such stress and strain, Is soon enough By cypress sough To tell my Love I am come again.

And if some day, When none cries nay, I still delay To seek her side, (Though ample measure Of fitting leisure Await my pleasure) She will riot chide.

What--not upbraid me That I delayed me, Nor ask what stayed me So long? Ah, no! New cares may claim me, New loves inflame me, She will not blame me, But suffer it so. Thomas Hardy

6

"I Said to Love" I said to Love, "It is not now as in old days When men adored thee and thy ways All else above; Named thee the Boy, the Bright, the One Who spread a heaven beneath the sun," I said to Love.

I said to him, "We now know more of thee than then; We were but weak in judgment when, With hearts abrim, We clamoured thee that thou would'st please Inflict on us thine agonies," I said to him. I said to Love, "Thou art not young, thou art not fair, No faery darts, no cherub air, Nor swan, nor dove Are thine; but features pitiless, And iron daggers of distress," I said to Love.

"Depart then, Love! . . . - Man's race shall end, dost threaten thou? The age to come the man of now Know nothing of? We fear not such a threat from thee; We are too old in apathy! Mankind shall cease.--So let it be," I said to Love. Thomas Hardy

7

[Greek Title] Long have I framed weak phantasies of Thee, O Willer masked and dumb! Who makest Life become, As though by labouring all-unknowingly, Like one whom reveries numb. How much of consciousness informs Thy will Thy biddings, as if blind, Of death-inducing kind, Nought shows to us ephemeral ones who fill But moments in Thy mind. Perhaps Thy ancient rote-restricted ways Thy ripening rule transcends; That listless effort tends To grow percipient with advance of days, And with percipience mends. For, in unwonted purlieus, far and nigh, At whiles or short or long, May be discerned a wrong Dying as of self-slaughter; whereat I Would raise my voice in song. Thomas Hardy

8

A Broken Appointment You did not come, And marching Time drew on, and wore me numb. Yet less for loss of your dear presence there Than that I thus found lacking in your make That high compassion which can overbear Reluctance for pure lovingkindness' sake Grieved I, when, as the hope-hour stroked its sum, You did not come. You love me not, And love alone can lend you loyalty; -I know and knew it. But, unto the store Of human deeds divine in all but name, Was it not worth a little hour or more To add yet this: Once you, a woman, came To soothe a time-torn man; even though it be You love me not. Thomas Hardy

9

A Christmas Ghost Story. South of the Line, inland from far Durban, A mouldering soldier lies--your countryman. Awry and doubled up are his gray bones, And on the breeze his puzzled phantom moans Nightly to clear Canopus: "I would know By whom and when the All-Earth-gladdening Law Of Peace, brought in by that Man Crucified, Was ruled to be inept, and set aside? And what of logic or of truth appears In tacking 'Anno Domini' to the years? Near twenty-hundred livened thus have hied, But tarries yet the Cause for which He died." Thomas Hardy

10

A Christmas Ghost-Story South of the Line, inland from far Durban, A mouldering soldier lies--your countryman. Awry and doubled up are his gray bones, And on the breeze his puzzled phantom moans Nightly to clear Canopus: "I would know By whom and when the All-Earth-gladdening Law Of Peace, brought in by that Man Crucified, Was ruled to be inept, and set aside? And what of logic or of truth appears In tacking 'Anno Domini' to the years? Near twenty-hundred livened thus have hied, But tarries yet the Cause for which He died." Thomas Hardy

11

A Commonplace Day The day is turning ghost, And scuttles from the kalendar in fits and furtively, To join the anonymous host Of those that throng oblivion; ceding his place, maybe, To one of like degree.

I part the fire-gnawed logs, Rake forth the embers, spoil the busy flames, and lay the ends Upon the shining dogs; Further and further from the nooks the twilight's stride extends, And beamless black impends.

Nothing of tiniest worth Have I wrought, pondered, planned; no one thing asking blame or praise, Since the pale corpse-like birth Of this diurnal unit, bearing blanks in all its rays Dullest of dull-hued Days!

Wanly upon the panes The rain slides as have slid since morn my colourless thoughts; and yet Here, while Day's presence wanes, And over him the sepulchre-lid is slowly lowered and set, He wakens my regret. Regret--though nothing dear That I wot of, was toward in the wide world at his prime, Or bloomed elsewhere than here, To die with his decease, and leave a memory sweet, sublime, Or mark him out in Time . . .

--Yet, maybe, in some soul, In some spot undiscerned on sea or land, some impulse rose, Or some intent upstole Of that enkindling ardency from whose maturer glows The world's amendment flows; But which, benumbed at birth By momentary chance or wile, has missed its hope to be Embodied on the earth; And undervoicings of this loss to man's futurity May wake regret in me. Thomas Hardy

12

A Commonplace Day. The day is turning ghost, And scuttles from the kalendar in fits and furtively, To join the anonymous host Of those that throng oblivion; ceding his place, maybe, To one of like degree.

I part the fire-gnawed logs, Rake forth the embers, spoil the busy flames, and lay the ends Upon the shining dogs; Further and further from the nooks the twilight's stride extends, And beamless black impends.

Nothing of tiniest worth Have I wrought, pondered, planned; no one thing asking blame or praise, Since the pale corpse-like birth Of this diurnal unit, bearing blanks in all its rays Dullest of dull-hued Days!

Wanly upon the panes The rain slides as have slid since morn my colourless thoughts; and yet Here, while Day's presence wanes, And over him the sepulchre-lid is slowly lowered and set, He wakens my regret. Regret--though nothing dear That I wot of, was toward in the wide world at his prime, Or bloomed elsewhere than here, To die with his decease, and leave a memory sweet, sublime, Or mark him out in Time . . .

--Yet, maybe, in some soul, In some spot undiscerned on sea or land, some impulse rose, Or some intent upstole Of that enkindling ardency from whose maturer glows The world's amendment flows; But which, benumbed at birth By momentary chance or wile, has missed its hope to be Embodied on the earth; And undervoicings of this loss to man's futurity May wake regret in me. Thomas Hardy

13

A Confession To A Friend in Trouble YOUR troubles shrink not, though I feel them less Here, far away, than when I tarried near; I even smile old smiles--with listlessness-Yet smiles they are, not ghastly mockeries mere. A thought too strange to house within my brain Haunting its outer precincts I discern: --That I will not show zeal again to learn Your griefs, and, sharing them, renew my pain....

Thomas Hardy

It goes, like murky bird or buccaneer That shapes its lawless figure on the main, And each new impulse tends to make outflee The unseemly instinct that had lodgment here; Yet, comrade old, can bitterer knowledge be Than that, though banned, such instinct was in me!

14

A Man (In Memory of H. of M.) I In Casterbridge there stood a noble pile, Wrought with pilaster, bay, and balustrade In tactful times when shrewd Eliza swayed. On burgher, squire, and clown It smiled the long street down for near a mile II But evil days beset that domicile; The stately beauties of its roof and wall Passed into sordid hands. Condemned to fall Were cornice, quoin, and cove, And all that art had wove in antique style. III Among the hired dismantlers entered there One till the moment of his task untold. When charged therewith he gazed, and answered bold: "Be needy I or no, I will not help lay low a house so fair! IV "Hunger is hard. But since the terms be such No wage, or labour stained with the disgrace Of wrecking what our age cannot replace To save its tasteless soul I'll do without your dole. Life is not much! V Dismissed with sneers he backed his tools and went, And wandered workless; for it seemed unwise To close with one who dared to criticize And carp on points of taste: To work where they were placed rude men were meant. VI Years whiled. He aged, sank, sickened, and was not: And it was said, "A man intractable And curst is gone." None sighed to hear his knell, None sought his churchyard-place; His name, his rugged face, were soon forgot. VII The stones of that fair hall lie far and wide, And but a few recall its ancient mould;

15

Yet when I pass the spot I long to hold As truth what fancy saith: "His protest lives where deathless things abide!" Thomas Hardy

16

A Meeting With Despair AS evening shaped I found me on a moor Which sight could scarce sustain: The black lean land, of featureless contour, Was like a tract in pain.

"This scene, like my own life," I said, "is one Where many glooms abide; Toned by its fortune to a deadly dun-Lightless on every side.

I glanced aloft and halted, pleasure-caught To see the contrast there: The ray-lit clouds gleamed glory; and I thought, "There's solace everywhere!" Then bitter self-reproaches as I stood I dealt me silently As one perverse--misrepresenting Good In graceless mutiny.

Against the horizon's dim-descernèd wheel A form rose, strange of mould: That he was hideous, hopeless, I could feel Rather than could behold.

"'Tis a dead spot, where even the light lies spent To darkness!" croaked the Thing. "Not if you look aloft!" said I, intent On my new reasoning.

Thomas Hardy

"Yea--but await awhile!" he cried. "Ho-ho!-Look now aloft and see!" I looked. There, too, sat night: Heaven's radiant show Had gone. Then chuckled he.

17

A Sign-Seeker I MARK the months in liveries dank and dry, The day-tides many-shaped and hued; I see the nightfall shades subtrude, And hear the monotonous hours clang negligently by. I view the evening bonfires of the sun On hills where morning rains have hissed; The eyeless countenance of the mist Pallidly rising when the summer droughts are done.

I have seen the lightning-blade, the leaping star, The caldrons of the sea in storm, Have felt the earthquake's lifting arm, And trodden where abysmal fires and snowcones are. I learn to prophesy the hid eclipse, The coming of eccentric orbs; To mete the dust the sky absorbs, To weigh the sun, and fix the hour each planet dips. I witness fellow earth-men surge and strive; Assemblies meet, and throb, and part; Death's soothing finger, sorrow's smart; --All the vast various moils that mean a world alive.

But that I fain would wot of shuns my sense-Those sights of which old prophets tell, Those signs the general word so well, Vouchsafed to their unheed, denied my watchings tense. In graveyard green, behind his monument To glimpse a phantom parent, friend, Wearing his smile, and "Not the end!" Outbreathing softly: that were blest enlightenment;

Or, if a dead Love's lips, whom dreams reveal When midnight imps of King Decay Delve sly to solve me back to clay, Should leave some print to prove her spirit-kisses real;

Or, when Earth's Frail lie bleeding of her Strong, If some Recorder, as in Writ, Near to the weary scene should flit And drop one plume as pledge that Heaven inscrolls the wrong. --There are who, rapt to heights of trancéd trust, These tokens claim to feel and see, Read radiant hints of times to be-Of heart to heart returning after dust to dust. Such scope is granted not my powers indign... I have lain in dead men's beds, have walked

18

The tombs of those with whom I'd talked, Called many a gone and goodly one to shape a sign,

Thomas Hardy

And panted for response. But none replies; No warnings loom, nor whisperings To open out my limitings, And Nescience mutely muses: When a man falls he lies.

19

A Spot In years defaced and lost, Two sat here, transport-tossed, Lit by a living love The wilted world knew nothing of: Scared momently By gaingivings, Then hoping things That could not be.

Of love and us no trace Abides upon the place; The sun and shadows wheel, Season and season sereward steal; Foul days and fair Here, too, prevail, And gust and gale As everywhere.

But lonely shepherd souls Who bask amid these knolls May catch a faery sound On sleepy noontides from the ground: "O not again Till Earth outwears Shall love like theirs Suffuse this glen!" Thomas Hardy

20

A Thunderstorm in Town She wore a 'terra-cotta' dress, And we stayed, because of the pelting storm, Within the hansom's dry recess, Though the horse had stopped; yea, motionless We sat on, snug and warm.

Then the downpour ceased, to my sharp sad pain, And the glass that had screened our forms before Flew up, and out she sprang to her door: I should have kissed her if the rain Had lasted a minute more. Thomas Hardy

21

A Wasted Illness Through vaults of pain, Enribbed and wrought with groins of ghastliness, I passed, and garish spectres moved my brain To dire distress.

And hammerings, And quakes, and shoots, and stifling hotness, blent With webby waxing things and waning things As on I went. "Where lies the end To this foul way?" I asked with weakening breath. Thereon ahead I saw a door extend The door to death. It loomed more clear: "At last!" I cried. "The all-delivering door!" And then, I knew not how, it grew less near Than theretofore. And back slid I Along the galleries by which I came, And tediously the day returned, and sky, And life--the same.

And all was well: Old circumstance resumed its former show, And on my head the dews of comfort fell As ere my woe.

I roam anew, Scarce conscious of my late distress . . . And yet Those backward steps through pain I cannot view Without regret. For that dire train Of waxing shapes and waning, passed before, And those grim aisles, must be traversed again To reach that door. Thomas Hardy

22

A Wife in London <i>December 1899</i> I She sits in the tawny vapour That the Thames-side lanes have uprolled, Behind whose webby fold-on-fold Like a waning taper The street-lamp glimmers cold. A messenger's knock cracks smartly, Flashed news in her hand Of meaning it dazes to understand Though shaped so shortly: He--he has fallen--in the far South Land... II 'Tis the morrow; the fog hangs thicker, The postman nears and goes: A letter is brought whose lines disclose By the firelight flicker His hand, whom the worm now knows:

Fresh--firm--penned in highest feather-Page-full of his hoped return, And of home-planned jaunts of brake and burn In the summer weather, And of new love that they would learn. Thomas Hardy

23

A Wife in London (December, 1899) I--The Tragedy She sits in the tawny vapour That the City lanes have uprolled, Behind whose webby fold on fold Like a waning taper The street-lamp glimmers cold.

A messenger's knock cracks smartly, Flashed news is in her hand Of meaning it dazes to understand Though shaped so shortly: He--has fallen--in the far South Land . . . II--The Irony 'Tis the morrow; the fog hangs thicker, The postman nears and goes: A letter is brought whose lines disclose By the firelight flicker His hand, whom the worm now knows:

Fresh--firm--penned in highest feather Page-full of his hoped return, And of home-planned jaunts by brake and burn In the summer weather, And of new love that they would learn. Thomas Hardy

24

Additions The Fire at Tranter Sweatley's

THEY had long met o' Zundays--her true love and she-And at junketings, maypoles, and flings; But she bode wi' a thirtover uncle, and he Swore by noon and by night that her goodman should be Naibor Sweatley--a gaffer oft weak at the knee From taking o' sommat more cheerful than tea-Who tranted, and moved people's things. She cried, "O pray pity me!" Nought would he hear; Then with wild rainy eyes she obeyed, She chid when her Love was for clinking off wi' her. The pa'son was told, as the season drew near To throw over pu'pit the names of the peäir As fitting one flesh to be made.

The wedding-day dawned and the morning drew on; The couple stood bridegroom and bride; The evening was passed, and when midnight had gone The folks horned out, "God save the King," and anon The two home-along gloomily hied. The lover Tim Tankens mourned heart-sick and drear To be thus of his darling deprived: He roamed in the dark ath'art field, mound, and mere, And, a'most without knowing it, found himself near The house of the tranter, and now of his Dear, Where the lantern-light showed 'em arrived.

The bride sought her cham'er so calm and so pale That a Northern had thought her resigned; But to eyes that had seen her in tide-times of weal, Like the white cloud o' smoke, the red battlefield's vail, That look spak' of havoc behind.

The bridegroom yet laitered a beaker to drain, Then reeled to the linhay for more, When the candle-snoff kindled some chaff from his grain-Flames spread, and red vlankers, wi' might and wi' main, And round beams, thatch, and chimley-tun roar. Young Tim away yond, rafted up by the light, Through brimble and underwood tears, Till he comes to the orchet, when crooping thereright In the lewth of a codlin-tree, bivering wi' fright, Wi' on'y her night-rail to screen her from sight, His lonesome young Barbree appears. Her cwold little figure half-naked he views Played about by the frolicsome breeze,

25

Her light-tripping totties, her ten little tooes, All bare and besprinkled wi' Fall's chilly dews, While her great gallied eyes, through her hair hanging loose, Sheened as stars through a tardle o' trees. She eyed en; and, as when a weir-hatch is drawn, Her tears, penned by terror afore, With a rushing of sobs in a shower were strawn, Till her power to pour 'em seemed wasted and gone From the heft o' misfortune she bore.

"O Tim, my own Tim I must call 'ee--I will! All the world ha' turned round on me so! Can you help her who loved 'ee, though acting so ill? Can you pity her misery--feel for her still? When worse than her body so quivering and chill Is her heart in its winter o' woe! "I think I mid almost ha' borne it," she said, "Had my griefs one by one come to hand; But O, to be slave to thik husbird for bread, And then, upon top o' that, driven to wed, And then, upon top o' that, burnt out o' bed, Is more than my nater can stand!"

Tim's soul like a lion 'ithin en outsprung-(Tim had a great soul when his feelings were wrung)-"Feel for 'ee, dear Barbree?" he cried; And his warm working-jacket about her he flung, Made a back, horsed her up, till behind him she clung Like a chiel on a gipsy, her figure uphung By the sleeves that around her he tied. Over piggeries, and mixens, and apples, and hay, They lumpered straight into the night; And finding bylong where a halter-path lay, At dawn reached Tim's house, on'y seen on their way By a naibor or two who were up wi' the day; But they gathered no clue to the sight.

Then tender Tim Tankens he searched here and there For some garment to clothe her fair skin; But though he had breeches and waistcoats to spare, He had nothing quite seemly for Barbree to wear, Who, half shrammed to death, stood and cried on a chair At the caddle she found herself in. There was one thing to do, and that one thing he did, He lent her some clouts of his own, And she took 'em perforce; and while in 'em she slid, Tim turned to the winder, as modesty bid, Thinking, "O that the picter my duty keeps hid

26

In the tallet he stowed her; there huddied she lay, Shortening sleeves, legs, and tails to her limbs; But most o' the time in a mortal bad way, Well knowing that there'd be the divel to pay If 'twere found that, instead o' the elements' prey, She was living in lodgings at Tim's.

To the sight o' my eyes mid be shown!"

"Where's the tranter?" said men and boys; "where can er be?" "Where's the tranter?" said Barbree alone. "Where on e'th is the tranter?" said everybod-y: They sifted the dust of his perished roof-tree, And all they could find was a bone. Then the uncle cried, "Lord, pray have mercy on me!" And in terror began to repent. But before 'twas complete, and till sure she was free, Barbree drew up her loft-ladder, tight turned her key-Tim bringing up breakfast and dinner and tea-Till the news of her hiding got vent.

Thomas Hardy

Then followed the custom-kept rout, shout, and flare Of a skimmington-ride through the naiborhood, ere Folk had proof o' wold Sweatley's decay. Whereupon decent people all stood in a stare, Saying Tim and his lodger should risk it, and pair: So he took her to church. An' some laughing lads there Cried to Tim, "After Sweatley!" She said, "I declare I stand as a maiden to-day!"

27

After Schiller Knight, a true sister-love This heart retains; Ask me no other love, That way lie pains!

Calm must I view thee come, Calm see thee go; Tale-telling tears of thine I must not know! Thomas Hardy

28

Afterwards When the Present has latched its postern behind my tremulous stay, And the May month flaps its glad green leaves like wings, Delicate-filmed as new-spun silk, will the neighbours say, 'He was a man who used to notice such things'? If it be in the dusk when, like an eyelid's soundless blink, The dewfall-hawk comes crossing the shades to alight Upon the wind-warped upland thorn, a gazer may think, 'To him this must have been a familiar sight.'

If I pass during some nocturnal blackness, mothy and warm, When the hedgehog travels furtively over the lawn, One may say, 'He strove that such innocent creatures should come to no harm, But he could do little for them; and now he is gone.' If, when hearing that I have been stilled at last, they stand at the door, Watching the full-starred heavens that winter sees Will this thought rise on those who will meet my face no more, 'He was one who had an eye for such mysteries'? And will any say when my bell of quittance is heard in the gloom And a crossing breeze cuts a pause in its outrollings, Till they rise again, as they were a new bell's boom, 'He hears it not now, but used to notice such things'? Thomas Hardy

29

Ah, Are You Digging on My Grave? "Ah, are you digging on my grave, My loved one? -- planting rue?" -- "No: yesterday he went to wed One of the brightest wealth has bred. 'It cannot hurt her now,' he said, 'That I should not be true.'"

"Then who is digging on my grave, My nearest dearest kin?" -- "Ah, no: they sit and think, 'What use! What good will planting flowers produce? No tendance of her mound can loose Her spirit from Death's gin.'"

"But someone digs upon my grave? My enemy? -- prodding sly?" -- "Nay: when she heard you had passed the Gate That shuts on all flesh soon or late, She thought you no more worth her hate, And cares not where you lie. "Then, who is digging on my grave? Say -- since I have not guessed!" -- "O it is I, my mistress dear, Your little dog , who still lives near, And much I hope my movements here Have not disturbed your rest?" "Ah yes! You dig upon my grave... Why flashed it not to me That one true heart was left behind! What feeling do we ever find To equal among human kind A dog's fidelity!" "Mistress, I dug upon your grave To bury a bone, in case I should be hungry near this spot When passing on my daily trot. I am sorry, but I quite forgot It was your resting place." Thomas Hardy

30

Amabel I MARKED her ruined hues, Her custom-straitened views, And asked, "Can there indwell My Amabel?"

I looked upon her gown, Once rose, now earthen brown; The change was like the knell Of Amabel. Her step's mechanic ways Had lost the life of May's; Her laugh, once sweet in swell, Spoilt Amabel.

I mused: "Who sings the strain I sang ere warmth did wane? Who thinks its numbers spell His Amabel?"--

Knowing that, though Love cease, Love's race shows undecrease; All find in dorp or dell An Amabel. --I felt that I could creep To some housetop, and weep, That Time the tyrant fell Ruled Amabel! I said (the while I sighed That love like ours had died), "Fond things I'll no more tell To Amabel, "But leave her to her fate, And fling across the gate, 'Till the Last Trump, farewell, O Amabel!'"

Thomas Hardy

31

An Ancient to Ancients Where once we danced, where once we sang, Gentlemen, The floors are sunken, cobwebs hang, And cracks creep; worms have fed upon The doors. Yea, sprightlier times were then Than now, with harps and tabrets gone, Gentlemen! Where once we rowed, where once we sailed, Gentlemen, And damsels took the tiller, veiled Against too strong a stare (God wot Their fancy, then or anywhen!) Upon that shore we are clean forgot, Gentlemen!

We have lost somewhat of that, afar and near, Gentlemen, The thinning of our ranks each year Affords a hint we are nigh undone, That shall not be ever again The marked of many, loved of one, Gentlemen. In dance the polka hit our wish, Gentlemen, The paced quadrille, the spry schottische, "Sir Roger."--And in opera spheres The "Girl" (the famed "Bohemian"), And "Trovatore" held the ears, Gentlemen.

This season's paintings do not please, Gentlemen Like Etty, Mulready, Maclise; Throbbing romance had waned and wanned; No wizard wields the witching pen Of Bulwer, Scott, Dumas, and Sand, Gentlemen. The bower we shrined to Tennyson, Gentlemen, Is roof-wrecked; damps there drip upon Sagged seats, the creeper-nails are rust, The spider is sole denizen; Even she who voiced those rhymes is dust, Gentlemen! We who met sunrise sanguine-souled, Gentlemen, Are wearing weary. We are old; These younger press; we feel our rout

32

Is imminent to Aïdes' den,-That evening shades are stretching out, Gentlemen!

And yet, though ours be failing frames, Gentlemen, So were some others' history names, Who trode their track light-limbed and fast As these youth, and not alien From enterprise, to their long last, Gentlemen. Sophocles, Plato, Socrates, Gentlemen, Pythagoras, Thucydides, Herodotus, and Homer,--yea, Clement, Augustin, Origen, Burnt brightlier towards their setting-day, Gentlemen.

And ye, red-lipped and smooth-browed; list, Gentlemen; Much is there waits you we have missed; Much lore we leave you worth the knowing, Much, much has lain outside our ken; Nay, rush not: time serves: we are going, Gentlemen. Thomas Hardy

33

An August Midnight I A shaded lamp and a waving blind, And the beat of a clock from a distant floor: On this scene enter--winged, horned, and spined A longlegs, a moth, and a dumbledore; While 'mid my page there idly stands A sleepy fly, that rubs its hands . . . II Thus meet we five, in this still place, At this point of time, at this point in space. - My guests parade my new-penned ink, Or bang at the lamp-glass, whirl, and sink. "God's humblest, they!" I muse. Yet why? They know Earth-secrets that know not I. Thomas Hardy

34

An Autumn Rain-Scene There trudges one to a merry-making With sturdy swing, On whom the rain comes down. To fetch the saving medicament Is another bent, On whom the rain comes down.

One slowly drives his herd to the stall Ere ill befall, On whom the rain comes down.

This bears his missives of life and death With quickening breath, On whom the rain comes down.

One watches for signals of wreck or war From the hill afar, On whom the rain comes down. No care if he gain a shelter or none, Unhired moves on, On whom the rain comes down.

And another knows nought of its chilling fall Upon him aat all, On whom the rain comes down. October 1904 Thomas Hardy

35

Architectural Masks I There is a house with ivied walls, And mullioned windows worn and old, And the long dwellers in those halls Have souls that know but sordid calls, And dote on gold. II In a blazing brick and plated show Not far away a 'villa' gleams, And here a family few may know, With book and pencil, viol and bow, Lead inner lives of dreams. III The philosophic passers say, 'See that old mansion mossed and fair, Poetic souls therein are they: And O that gaudy box! Away, You vulgar people there.' Thomas Hardy

36

At A Bridal WHEN you paced forth, to wait maternity, A dream of other offspring held my mind, Compounded of us twain as Love designed; Rare forms, that corporate now will never be!

Should I, too, wed as slave to Mode's decree, And each thus found apart, of false desire, A stolid line, whom no high aims will fire As had fired ours could ever have mingled we;

Thomas Hardy

And, grieved that lives so matched should miscompose, Each mourn the double waste; and question dare To the Great Dame whence incarnation flows, Why those high-purposed children never were: What will she answer? That she does not care If the race all such sovereign types unknows.

37

At a Hasty Wedding If hours be years the twain are blest, For now they solace swift desire By bonds of every bond the best, If hours be years. The twain are blest Do eastern stars slope never west, Nor pallid ashes follow fire: If hours be years the twain are blest, For now they solace swift desire. Thomas Hardy

38

At a Lunar Eclipse Thy shadow, Earth, from Pole to Central Sea, Now steals along upon the Moon's meek shine In even monochrome and curving line Of imperturbable serenity. How shall I link such sun-cast symmetry With the torn troubled form I know as thine, That profile, placid as a brow divine, With continents of moil and misery?

And can immense Mortality but throw So small a shade, and Heaven's high human scheme Be hemmed within the coasts yon arc implies? Is such the stellar gauge of earthly show, Nation at war with nation, brains that teem, Heroes, and women fairer than the skies? Thomas Hardy

39

At A Lunar Eclipse. Thy shadow, Earth, from Pole to Central Sea, Now steals along upon the Moon's meek shine In even monochrome and curving line Of imperturbable serenity. How shall I link such sun-cast symmetry With the torn troubled form I know as thine, That profile, placid as a brow divine, With continents of moil and misery?

And can immense Mortality but throw So small a shade, and Heaven's high human scheme Be hemmed within the coasts yon arc implies? Is such the stellar gauge of earthly show, Nation at war with nation, brains that teem, Heroes, and women fairer than the skies? Thomas Hardy

40

At An Inn WHEN we as strangers sought Their catering care, Veiled smiles bespoke their thought Of what we were. They warmed as they opined Us more than friends-That we had all resigned For love's dear ends. And that swift sympathy With living love Which quicks the world--maybe The spheres above, Made them our ministers, Moved them to say, "Ah, God, that bliss like theirs Would flush our day!"

And we were left alone As Love's own pair; Yet never the love-light shone Between us there! But that which chilled the breath Of afternoon, And palsied unto death The pane-fly's tune. The kiss their zeal foretold, And now deemed come, Came not: within his hold Love lingered numb. Why cast he on our port A bloom not ours? Why shaped us for his sport In after-hours?

Thomas Hardy

As we seemed we were not That day afar, And now we seem not what We aching are. O severing sea and land, O laws of men, Ere death, once let us stand As we stood then!

41

At Castle Boterel As I drive to the junction of lane and highway, And the drizzle bedrenches the waggonette, I look behind at the fading byway, And see on its slope, now glistening wet, Distinctly yet Myself and a girlish form benighted In dry March weather. We climb the road Beside a chaise. We had just alighted To ease the sturdy pony's load When he sighed and slowed.

And to me, though Time's unflinching rigour, In mindless rote, has ruled from sight The substance now, one phantom figure Remains on the slope, as when that night Saw us alight. I look and see it there, shrinking, shrinking, I look back at it amid the rain For the very last time; for my sand is sinking, And I shall traverse old love's domain Never again.

Primaeval rocks form the road's steep border, And much have they faced there, first and last, Of the transitory in Earth's long order; But what they record in colour and cast Is - that we two passed.

It filled but a minute. But was there ever A time of such quality, since or before, In that hill's story? To one mind never, Though it has been climbed, foot-swift, foot-sore, By thousands more.

What we did as we climbed, and what we talked of Matters not much, nor to what it led, Something that life will not be balked of Without rude reason till hope is dead, And feeling fled.

Thomas Hardy

42

At Lulworth Cove a Century Back Had I but lived a hundred years ago I might have gone, as I have gone this year, By Warmwell Cross on to a Cove I know, And Time have placed his finger on me there:

<i>"You see that man?"</i> -- I might have looked, and said, "O yes: I see him. One that boat has brought Which dropped down Channel round Saint Alban's Head. So commonplace a youth calls not my thought." <i>"You see that man?"</i> -- "Why yes; I told you; yes: Of an idling town-sort; thin; hair brown in hue; And as the evening light scants less and less He looks up at a star, as many do."

<i>"You see that man?"</i> -- "Nay, leave me!" then I plead, "I have fifteen miles to vamp across the lea, And it grows dark, and I am weary-kneed: I have said the third time; yes, that man I see!" "Good. That man goes to Rome -- to death, despair; And no one notes him now but you and I: A hundred years, and the world will follow him there, And bend with reverence where his ashes lie." Thomas Hardy

43

At the Railway Station, Upways 'There is not much that I can do, For I've no money that's quite my own!' Spoke up the pitying child-A little boy with a violin At the station before the train came in,-'But I can play my fiddle to you, And a nice one 'tis, and good in tone!'

The man in the handcuffs smiled; The constable looked, and he smiled too, As the fiddle began to twang; And the man in the handcuffs suddenly sang With grimful glee: 'This life so free Is the thing for me!' And the constable smiled, and said no word, As if unconscious of what he heard; And so they went on till the train came in-The convict, and boy with the violin. Thomas Hardy

44

At the War Office, London (Affixing the Lists of Killed and Wounded: December, 1899) I Last year I called this world of gain-givings The darkest thinkable, and questioned sadly If my own land could heave its pulse less gladly, So charged it seemed with circumstance whence springs The tragedy of things. II Yet at that censured time no heart was rent Or feature blanched of parent, wife, or daughter By hourly blazoned sheets of listed slaughter; Death waited Nature's wont; Peace smiled unshent From Ind to Occident. Thomas Hardy

45

At the War Office, London. I Last year I called this world of gain-givings The darkest thinkable, and questioned sadly If my own land could heave its pulse less gladly, So charged it seemed with circumstance whence springs The tragedy of things. II Yet at that censured time no heart was rent Or feature blanched of parent, wife, or daughter By hourly blazoned sheets of listed slaughter; Death waited Nature's wont; Peace smiled unshent From Ind to Occident. Thomas Hardy

46

Beeny Cliff I O the opal and the sapphire of that wandering western sea, And the woman riding high above with bright hair flapping freeThe woman whom I loved so, and who loyally loved me.

II The pale mews plained below us, and the waves seemed far away In a nether sky, engrossed in saying their ceaseless babbling say, As we laughed light-heartedly aloft on that clear-sunned March day. III A little cloud then cloaked us, and there flew an irised rain, And the Atlantic dyed its levels with a dull misfeatured stain, And then the sun burst out again, and purples prinked the main.

IV -Still in all its chasmal beauty bulks old Beeny to the sky, And shall she and I not go there once again now March is nigh, And the sweet things said in that March say anew there by and by?

V What if still in chasmal beauty looms that wild weird western shore, The woman now is-elsewhere-whom the ambling pony bore, And nor knows nor cares for Beeny, and will laugh there nevermore. Thomas Hardy

47

Between Us Now Between us now and here-Two thrown together Who are not wont to wear Life's flushest feather--

Who see the scenes slide past, The daytimes dimming fast, Let there be truth at last, Even if despair. So thoroughly and long Have you now known me, So real in faith and strong Have I now shown me, That nothing needs disguise Further in any wise, Or asks or justifies A guarded tongue.

Face unto face, then, say, Eyes my own meeting, Is your heart far away, Or with mine beating? When false things are brought low, And swift things have grown slow, Feigning like froth shall go, Faith be for aye. Thomas Hardy

48

Birds at Winter Nightfall (Triolet) Around the house the flakes fly faster, And all the berries now are gone From holly and cotoneaster Around the house. The flakes fly!--faster Shutting indoors that crumb-outcaster We used to see upon the lawn Around the house. The flakes fly faster, And all the berries now are gone! Thomas Hardy

49

By the Earth's Corpse I "O Lord, why grievest Thou? Since Life has ceased to be Upon this globe, now cold As lunar land and sea, And humankind, and fowl, and fur Are gone eternally, All is the same to Thee as ere They knew mortality." II "O Time," replied the Lord, "Thou read'st me ill, I ween; Were all THE SAME, I should not grieve At that late earthly scene, Now blestly past--though planned by me With interest close and keen! Nay, nay: things now are NOT the same As they have earlier been. III "Written indelibly On my eternal mind Are all the wrongs endured By Earth's poor patient kind, Which my too oft unconscious hand Let enter undesigned. No god can cancel deeds foredone, Or thy old coils unwind! IV "As when, in Noe's days, I whelmed the plains with sea, So at this last, when flesh And herb but fossils be, And, all extinct, their piteous dust Revolves obliviously, That I made Earth, and life, and man, It still repenteth me!" Thomas Hardy

50

Cardinal Bembo's Epitaph on Raphael Here's one in whom Nature feared--faint at such vying Eclipse while he lived, and decease at his dying. Thomas Hardy

51

Catullus: XXXI (After passing Sirmione, April 1887.) Sirmio, thou dearest dear of strands That Neptune strokes in lake and sea, With what high joy from stranger lands Doth thy old friend set foot on thee! Yea, barely seems it true to me That no Bithynia holds me now, But calmly and assuringly Around me stretchest homely Thou.

Is there a scene more sweet than when Our clinging cares are undercast, And, worn by alien moils and men, The long untrodden sill repassed, We press the pined for couch at last, And find a full repayment there? Then hail, sweet Sirmio; thou that wast, And art, mine own unrivalled Fair! Thomas Hardy

52

Channel Firing That night your great guns, unawares, Shook all our coffins as we lay, And broke the chancel window-squares, We thought it was the judgement day And sat upright. While drearisome Arose the howl of wakened hounds: The mouse let fall the altar-crumb, The worms drew back into the mounds,

The glebe cow drooled. Till God called, "No; It's gunnery practice out at sea Just as before you went below; The world is as it used to be: "All nations striving strong to make Red war yet redder. Mad as hatters They do more for Christés sake Than you who are helpless in such matters. "That this is not the judgment hour For some of them's a blessed thing, For if it were they'd have to scour Hells floor for so much threatening... "Ha, ha. It will be warmer when I blow the trumpet (if indeed I ever do; for you are men, And rest eternal sorely need)."

So down we lay again. "I wonder, Will the world ever saner be," Said one, "than when He sent us under In our indifferent century!" And many a skeleton shook his head. "Instead of preaching forty year," My neighbor Oarson Thirdly said, "I wish I had stuck to pipes and beer." Again the guns disturbed the hour, Roaring their readiness to avenge, As far inland as Stourton Tower, And Camelot, and starlit Stonehenge. Thomas Hardy

53

De Profundis I "Percussus sum sicut foenum, et aruit cor meum." - Ps. ci Wintertime nighs; But my bereavement-pain It cannot bring again: Twice no one dies.

Flower-petals flee; But, since it once hath been, No more that severing scene Can harrow me.

Birds faint in dread: I shall not lose old strength In the lone frost's black length: Strength long since fled! Leaves freeze to dun; But friends can not turn cold This season as of old For him with none.

Tempests may scath; But love can not make smart Again this year his heart Who no heart hath. Black is night's cope; But death will not appal One who, past doubtings all, Waits in unhope. De Profundis II

"Considerabam ad dexteram, et videbam; et non erat qui cognosceret me When the clouds' swoln bosoms echo back the shouts of the many and strong That things are all as they best may be, save a few to be right ere long, And my eyes have not the vision in them to discern what to these is so clear, The blot seems straightway in me alone; one better he were not here. The stout upstanders say, All's well with us: ruers have nought to rue! And what the potent say so oft, can it fail to be somewhat true? Breezily go they, breezily come; their dust smokes around their

54

career, Till I think I am one horn out of due time, who has no calling here.

Their dawns bring lusty joys, it seems; their eves exultance sweet; Our times are blessed times, they cry: Life shapes it as is most meet, And nothing is much the matter; there are many smiles to a tear; Then what is the matter is I, I say. Why should such an one be here? Let him to whose ears the low-voiced Best seems stilled by the clash of the First, Who holds that if way to the Better there be, it exacts a full look at the Worst, Who feels that delight is a delicate growth cramped by crookedness, custom, and fear, Get him up and be gone as one shaped awry; he disturbs the order here. De Profundis III "Heu mihi, quia incolatus meus prolongatus est! Habitavi cum habitantibus Cedar; multum incola fuit aninia mea."--Ps. cxix.

There have been times when I well might have passed and the ending have come Points in my path when the dark might have stolen on me, artless, unrueing Ere I had learnt that the world was a welter of futile doing: Such had been times when I well might have passed, and the ending have come! Say, on the noon when the half-sunny hours told that April was nigh, And I upgathered and cast forth the snow from the crocus-border, Fashioned and furbished the soil into a summer-seeming order, Glowing in gladsome faith that I quickened the year thereby.

Or on that loneliest of eves when afar and benighted we stood, She who upheld me and I, in the midmost of Egdon together, Confident I in her watching and ward through the blackening heather, Deeming her matchless in might and with measureless scope endued.

Or on that winter-wild night when, reclined by the chimney-nook quoin, Slowly a drowse overgat me, the smallest and feeblest of folk there, Weak from my baptism of pain; when at times and anon I awoke there Heard of a world wheeling on, with no listing or longing to join. Even then! while unweeting that vision could vex or that knowledge could numb, That sweets to the mouth in the belly are bitter, and tart, and untoward,

55

Then, on some dim-coloured scene should my briefly raised curtain have lowered, Then might the Voice that is law have said "Cease!" and the ending have come. Thomas Hardy

56

Departure (Southampton Docks: October, 1899) While the far farewell music thins and fails, And the broad bottoms rip the bearing brine All smalling slowly to the gray sea line And each significant red smoke-shaft pales,

Keen sense of severance everywhere prevails, Which shapes the late long tramp of mounting men To seeming words that ask and ask again: "How long, O striving Teutons, Slavs, and Gaels

Must your wroth reasonings trade on lives like these, That are as puppets in a playing hand? When shall the saner softer polities Whereof we dream, have play in each proud land, And patriotism, grown Godlike, scorn to stand Bondslave to realms, but circle earth and seas?" Thomas Hardy

57

Departure. While the far farewell music thins and fails, And the broad bottoms rip the bearing brine All smalling slowly to the gray sea line And each significant red smoke-shaft pales,

Keen sense of severance everywhere prevails, Which shapes the late long tramp of mounting men To seeming words that ask and ask again: "How long, O striving Teutons, Slavs, and Gaels

Must your wroth reasonings trade on lives like these, That are as puppets in a playing hand? When shall the saner softer polities Whereof we dream, have play in each proud land, And patriotism, grown Godlike, scorn to stand Bondslave to realms, but circle earth and seas?" Thomas Hardy

58

Ditty (E. L. G.) BENEATH a knap where flown Nestlings play, Within walls of weathered stone, Far away From the files of formal houses, By the bough the firstling browses, Lives a Sweet: no merchants meet, No man barters, no man sells Where she dwells.

Upon that fabric fair "Here is she!" Seems written everywhere Unto me. But to friends and nodding neighbors, Fellow wights in lot and labors, Who descry the times as I, No such lucid legend tells Where she dwells.

Should I lapse to what I was In days by-(Such cannot be, but because Some loves die Let me feign it)--none would notice That where she I know by rote is Spread a strange and withering change, Like a drying of the wells Where she dwells. To feel I might have kissed-Loved as true-Otherwhere, nor Mine have missed My life through, Had I never wandered near her, Is a smart severe--severer In the thought that she is nought, Even as I, beyond the dells Where she dwells. And Devotion droops her glance To recall What bond-servants of Chance We are all. I but found her in that, going On my errant path unknowing, I did not out-skirt the spot That no spot on earth excels-Where she dwells!
59

Thomas Hardy

60

Domicilium It faces west, and round the back and sides High beeches, bending, hang a veil of boughs, And sweep against the roof. Wild honeysucks Climb on the walls, and seem to sprout a wish (If we may fancy wish of trees and plants) To overtop the apple trees hard-by. Red roses, lilacs, variegated box Are there in plenty, and such hardy flowers As flourish best untrained. Adjoining these Are herbs and esculents; and farther still A field; then cottages with trees, and last The distant hills and sky.

Behind, the scene is wilder. Heath and furze Are everything that seems to grow and thrive Upon the uneven ground. A stunted thorn Stands here and there, indeed; and from a pit An oak uprises, Springing from a seed Dropped by some bird a hundred years ago.

In days bygone-Long gone--my father's mother, who is now Blest with the blest, would take me out to walk. At such a time I once inquired of her How looked the spot when first she settled here. The answer I remember. 'Fifty years Have passed since then, my child, and change has marked The face of all things. Yonder garden-plots And orchards were uncultivated slopes O'ergrown with bramble bushes, furze and thorn: That road a narrow path shut in by ferns, Which, almost trees, obscured the passers-by. Our house stood quite alone, and those tall firs And beeches were not planted. Snakes and efts Swarmed in the summer days, and nightly bats Would fly about our bedrooms. Heathcroppers Lived on the hills, and were our only friends; So wild it was when we first settled here.' Thomas Hardy

61

Doom and She I There dwells a mighty pair Slow, statuesque, intense Amid the vague Immense: None can their chronicle declare, Nor why they be, nor whence. ,h II Mother of all things made, Matchless in artistry, Unlit with sight is she. And though her ever well-obeyed Vacant of feeling he. III The Matron mildly asks A throb in every word "Our clay-made creatures, lord, How fare they in their mortal tasks Upon Earth's bounded bord? IV "The fate of those I bear, Dear lord, pray turn and view, And notify me true; Shapings that eyelessly I dare Maybe I would undo. V "Sometimes from lairs of life Methinks I catch a groan, Or multitudinous moan, As though I had schemed a world of strife, Working by touch alone." VI "World-weaver!" he replies, "I scan all thy domain; But since nor joy nor pain Doth my clear substance recognize, I read thy realms in vain. VII "World-weaver! what IS Grief? And what are Right, and Wrong,

62

And Feeling, that belong To creatures all who owe thee fief? What worse is Weak than Strong?" . . . VIII --Unlightened, curious, meek, She broods in sad surmise . . . --Some say they have heard her sighs On Alpine height or Polar peak When the night tempests rise. Thomas Hardy

63

Drummer Hodge They throw in Drummer Hodge, to rest Uncoffined -- just as found: His landmark is a kopje-crest That breaks the veldt around: And foreign constellations west Each night above his mound.

Young Hodge the drummer never knew -Fresh from his Wessex home -The meaning of the broad Karoo, The Bush, the dusty loam, And why uprose to nightly view Strange stars amid the gloam. Yet portion of that unknown plain Will Hodge for ever be; His homely Northern breast and brain Grow to some Southern tree, And strange-eyed constellations reign His stars eternally. Thomas Hardy

64

During Wind and Rain THEY sing their dearest songs-He, she, all of them--yea, Treble and tenor and bass. And one to play; With the candles mooning each face.... Ah, no; the years O! How the sick leaves reel down in throngs! They clear the creeping moss-Elders and juniors--aye, Making the pathways neat And the garden gay; And they build a shady seat.... Ah, no; the years, the years; See, the white storm-birds wing across!

They are blithely breakfasting all-Men and maidens--yea, Under the summer tree, With a glimpse of the bay, While pet fowl come to the knee.... Ah, no; the years O! And the rotten rose is ripped from the wall.

They change to a high new house, He, she, all of them--aye, Clocks and carpets and chairs On the lawn all day, And brightest things that are theirs.... Ah, no; the years, the years; Down their carved names the raindrop plows. Thomas Hardy

65

Embarcation <i>Southampton Docks: October 1899</i> Here, where Vespasian's legions struck the sands, And Cendric with the Saxons entered in, And Henry's army lept afloat to win Convincing triumphs over neighboring lands,

Vaster battalions press for further strands, To argue in the selfsame bloody mode Which this late age of thought, and pact, and code, Still fails to mend.--Now deckward tramp the bands, Yellow as autumn leaves, alive as spring; And as each host draws out upon the sea Beyond which lies the tragical To-be, None dubious of the cause, none murmuring,

Wives, sisters, parents, wave white hands and smile, As if they knew not that they weep the while. Thomas Hardy

66

Embarcation (Southampton Docks: October, 1899) Here, where Vespasian's legions struck the sands, And Cerdic with his Saxons entered in, And Henry's army leapt afloat to win Convincing triumphs over neighbour lands,

Vaster battalions press for further strands, To argue in the self-same bloody mode Which this late age of thought, and pact, and code, Still fails to mend.--Now deckward tramp the bands, Yellow as autumn leaves, alive as spring; And as each host draws out upon the sea Beyond which lies the tragical To-be, None dubious of the cause, none murmuring,

Wives, sisters, parents, wave white hands and smile, As if they knew not that they weep the while. Thomas Hardy

67

Epitaph on a pessimist I'm Smith of Stoke aged sixty odd I've lived without a dame all my life And wish to God My dad had done the same. Thomas Hardy

68

Fragment At last I entered a long dark gallery, Catacomb-lined; and ranged at the side Were the bodies of men from far and wide Who, motion past, were nevertheless not dead. "The sense of waiting here strikes strong; Everyone's waiting, waiting, it seems to me; What are you waiting for so long? -What is to happen?" I said.

"O we are waiting for one called God," said they, "(Though by some the Will, or Force, or Laws; And, vaguely, by some, the Ultimate Cause;) Waiting for him to see us before we are clay. Yes; waiting, waiting, for God to know it." ...

"To know what?" questioned I. "To know how things have been going on earth and below it: It is clear he must know some day." I thereon asked them why. "Since he made us humble pioneers Of himself in consciousness of Life's tears, It needs no mighty prophecy To tell that what he could mindlessly show His creatures, he himself will know. "By some still close-cowled mystery We have reached feeling faster than he, But he will overtake us anon, If the world goes on." Thomas Hardy

69

Friends Beyond WILLIAM Dewy, Tranter Reuben, Farmer Ledlow late at plough, Robert's kin, and John's, and Ned's, And the Squire, and Lady Susan, lie in Mellstock churchyard now!

"Gone," I call them, gone for good, that group of local hearts and heads; Yet at mothy curfew-tide, And at midnight when the noon-heat breathes it back from walls and leads, They've a way of whispering to me--fellow-wight who yet abide-In the muted, measured note Of a ripple under archways, or a lone cave's stillicide:

"We have triumphed: this achievement turns the bane to antidote, Unsuccesses to success, Many thought-worn eves and morrows to a morrow free of thought. "No more need we corn and clothing, feel of old terrestrial stress; Chill detraction stirs no sigh; Fear of death has even bygone us: death gave all that we possess."

W. D.--"Ye mid burn the wold bass-viol that I set such vallie by." Squire.--"You may hold the manse in fee, You may wed my spouse, my children's memory of me may decry."

Lady.--"You may have my rich brocades, my laces; take each household key; Ransack coffer, desk, bureau; Quiz the few poor treasures hid there, con the letters kept by me." Far.--"Ye mid zell my favorite heifer, ye mid let the charlock grow, Foul the grinterns, give up thrift." Wife.--"If ye break my best blue china, children, I sha'n't care or ho." All--"We've no wish to hear the tidings, how the people's fortunes shift; What your daily doings are; Who are wedded, born, divided; if your lives beat slow or swift. "Curious not the least are we if our intents you make or mar, If you quire to our old tune, If the City stage still passes, if the weirs still roar afar."

Thus, with very gods' composure, freed those crosses late and soon Which, in life, the Trine allow (Why, none witteth), and ignoring all that haps beneath the moon, William Dewy, Tranter Reuben, Farmer Ledlow late at plough, Robert's kin, and John's, and Ned's, And the Squire, and Lady Susan, murmur mildly to me now.

70

Thomas Hardy

71

From Victor Hugo Child, were I king, I'd yield my royal rule, My chariot, sceptre, vassal-service due, My crown, my porphyry-basined waters cool, My fleets, whereto the sea is but a pool, For a glance from you!

Love, were I God, the earth and its heaving airs, Angels, the demons abject under me, Vast chaos with its teeming womby lairs, Time, space, all would I give--aye, upper spheres, For a kiss from thee! Thomas Hardy

72

Genoa and the Mediterranean (March, 1887) O epic-famed, god-haunted Central Sea, Heave careless of the deep wrong done to thee When from Torino's track I saw thy face first flash on me. And multimarbled Genova the Proud, Gleam all unconscious how, wide-lipped, up-browed, I first beheld thee clad--not as the Beauty but the Dowd.

Out from a deep-delved way my vision lit On housebacks pink, green, ochreous--where a slit Shoreward 'twixt row and row revealed the classic blue through it.

And thereacross waved fishwives' high-hung smocks, Chrome kerchiefs, scarlet hose, darned underfrocks; Since when too oft my dreams of thee, O Queen, that frippery mocks: Whereat I grieve, Superba! . . . Afterhours Within Palazzo Doria's orange bowers Went far to mend these marrings of thy soul-subliming powers. But, Queen, such squalid undress none should see, Those dream-endangering eyewounds no more be Where lovers first behold thy form in pilgrimage to thee. Thomas Hardy

73

Genoa and the Mediterranean. O epic-famed, god-haunted Central Sea, Heave careless of the deep wrong done to thee When from Torino's track I saw thy face first flash on me. And multimarbled Genova the Proud, Gleam all unconscious how, wide-lipped, up-browed, I first beheld thee clad--not as the Beauty but the Dowd.

Out from a deep-delved way my vision lit On housebacks pink, green, ochreous--where a slit Shoreward 'twixt row and row revealed the classic blue through it.

And thereacross waved fishwives' high-hung smocks, Chrome kerchiefs, scarlet hose, darned underfrocks; Since when too oft my dreams of thee, O Queen, that frippery mocks: Whereat I grieve, Superba! . . . Afterhours Within Palazzo Doria's orange bowers Went far to mend these marrings of thy soul-subliming powers. But, Queen, such squalid undress none should see, Those dream-endangering eyewounds no more be Where lovers first behold thy form in pilgrimage to thee. Thomas Hardy

74

George Meredith Forty years back, when much had place That since has perished out of mind, I heard that voice and saw that face. He spoke as one afoot will wind A morning horn ere men awake; His note was trenchant, turning kind.

He was one of those whose wit can shake And riddle to the very core The counterfiets that Time will break.... Of late, when we two met once more, The luminous countenance and rare Shone just as forty years before.

So that, when now all tongues declare His shape unseen by his green hill, I scarce believe he sits not there.

No matter. Further and further still Through the world's vaprous vitiate air His words wing on--as live words will. Thomas Hardy

75

God-Forgotten I towered far, and lo! I stood within The presence of the Lord Most High, Sent thither by the sons of earth, to win Some answer to their cry.

--"The Earth, say'st thou? The Human race? By Me created? Sad its lot? Nay: I have no remembrance of such place: Such world I fashioned not." -

--"O Lord, forgive me when I say Thou spak'st the word, and mad'st it all." "The Earth of men--let me bethink me . . . Yea! I dimly do recall "Some tiny sphere I built long back (Mid millions of such shapes of mine) So named . . . It perished, surely--not a wrack Remaining, or a sign? "It lost my interest from the first, My aims therefor succeeding ill; Haply it died of doing as it durst?" "Lord, it existeth still." -

"Dark, then, its life! For not a cry Of aught it bears do I now hear; Of its own act the threads were snapt whereby Its plaints had reached mine ear. "It used to ask for gifts of good, Till came its severance self-entailed, When sudden silence on that side ensued, And has till now prevailed. "All other orbs have kept in touch; Their voicings reach me speedily: Thy people took upon them overmuch In sundering them from me!

"And it is strange--though sad enough Earth's race should think that one whose call Frames, daily, shining spheres of flawless stuff Must heed their tainted ball! . . .

"But say'st thou 'tis by pangs distraught, And strife, and silent suffering? Deep grieved am I that injury should be wrought Even on so poor a thing! "Thou should'st have learnt that Not to Mend For Me could mean but Not to Know:

76

Hence, Messengers! and straightway put an end To what men undergo." . . .

Homing at dawn, I thought to see One of the Messengers standing by. - Oh, childish thought! . . . Yet oft it comes to me When trouble hovers nigh. Thomas Hardy

77

God's Funeral I I saw a slowly-stepping train -Lined on the brows, scoop-eyed and bent and hoar -Following in files across a twilit plain A strange and mystic form the foremost bore. II And by contagious throbs of thought Or latent knowledge that within me lay And had already stirred me, I was wrought To consciousness of sorrow even as they.

III The fore-borne shape, to my blurred eyes, At first seemed man-like, and anon to change To an amorphous cloud of marvellous size, At times endowed with wings of glorious range. IV And this phantasmal variousness Ever possessed it as they drew along: Yet throughout all it symboled none the less Potency vast and loving-kindness strong.

V Almost before I knew I bent Towards the moving columns without a word; They, growing in bulk and numbers as they went, Struck out sick thoughts that could be overheard: -VI 'O man-projected Figure, of late Imaged as we, thy knell who shall survive? Whence came it we were tempted to create One whom we can no longer keep alive?

VII 'Framing him jealous, fierce, at first, We gave him justice as the ages rolled, Will to bless those by circumstance accurst, And longsuffering, and mercies manifold. VIII 'And, tricked by our own early dream And need of solace, we grew self-deceived, Our making soon our maker did we deem, And what we had imagined we believed, IX 'Till, in Time's stayless stealthy swing, Uncompromising rude reality Mangled the Monarch of our fashioning,

78

Who quavered, sank; and now has ceased to be.

X 'So, toward our myth's oblivion, Darkling, and languid-lipped, we creep and grope Sadlier than those who wept in Babylon, Whose Zion was a still abiding hope. XI 'How sweet it was in years far hied To start the wheels of day with trustful prayer, To lie down liegely at the eventide And feel a blest assurance he was there! XII 'And who or what shall fill his place? Whither will wanderers turn distracted eyes For some fixed star to stimulate their pace Towards the goal of their enterprise?'...

XIII Some in the background then I saw, Sweet women, youths, men, all incredulous, Who chimed as one: 'This is figure is of straw, This requiem mockery! Still he lives to us!'

XIV I could not prop their faith: and yet Many I had known: with all I sympathized; And though struck speechless, I did not forget That what was mourned for, I, too, once had prized. XV Still, how to bear such loss I deemed The insistent question for each animate mind, And gazing, to my growing sight there seemed A pale yet positive gleam low down behind,

XVI Whereof, to lift the general night, A certain few who stood aloof had said, 'See you upon the horizon that small light -Swelling somewhat?' Each mourner shook his head.

XVII And they composed a crowd of whom Some were right good, and many nigh the best.... Thus dazed and puzzled 'twixt the gleam and gloom Mechanically I followed with the rest. Thomas Hardy

79

Hap IF but some vengeful god would call to me From up the sky, and laugh: "Thou suffering thing, Know that thy sorrow is my ecstasy, That thy love's loss is my hate's profiting!" Then would I bear, and clench myself, and die, Steeled by the sense of ire unmerited; Half-eased, too, that a Powerfuller than I Had willed and meted me the tears I shed.

Thomas Hardy

But not so. How arrives it joy lies slain, And why unblooms the best hope ever sown? --Crass Casualty obstructs the sun and rain, And dicing Time for gladness casts a moan.... These purblind Doomsters had as readily strown Blisses about my pilgrimage as pain.

80

He Never Expected Much Well, World, you have kept faith with me, Kept faith with me; Upon the whole you have proved to be Much as you said you were. Since as a child I used to lie Upon the leaze and watch the sky, Never, I own, expected I That life would all be fair. 'Twas then you said, and since have said, Times since have said, In that mysterious voice you shed From clouds and hills around: "Many have loved me desperately, Many with smooth serenity, While some have shown contempt of me Till they dropped underground.

"I do not promise overmuch, Child; overmuch; Just neutral-tinted haps and such," You said to minds like mine. Wise warning for your credit's sake! Which I for one failed not to take, And hence could stem such strain and ache As each year might assign. Thomas Hardy

81

Heiress And Architect For A. W. B. SHE sought the Studios, beckoning to her side An arch-designer, for she planned to build. He was of wise contrivance, deeply skilled In every intervolve of high and wide-Well fit to be her guide. "Whatever it be," Responded he, With cold, clear voice, and cold, clear view, "In true accord with prudent fashionings For such vicissitudes as living brings, And thwarting not the law of stable things, That will I do."

"Shape me," she said, "high walls with tracery And open ogive-work, that scent and hue Of buds, and travelling bees, may come in through, The note of birds, and singings of the sea, For these are much to me." "An idle whim!" Broke forth from him Whom nought could warm to gallantries: "Cede all these buds and birds, the zephyr's call, And scents, and hues, and things that falter all, And choose as best the close and surly wall, For winter's freeze."

"Then frame," she cried, "wide fronts of crystal glass, That I may show my laughter and my light-Light like the sun's by day, the stars' by night-Till rival heart-queens, envying, wail, 'Alas, Her glory!' as they pass." "O maid misled!" He sternly said, Whose facile foresight pierced her dire; "Where shall abide the soul when, sick of glee, It shrinks, and hides, and prays no eye may see? Those house them best who house for secrecy, For you will tire." "A little chamber, then, with swan and dove Ranged thickly, and engrailed with rare device Of reds and purples, for a Paradise Wherein my Love may greet me, I my Love, When he shall know thereof?" "This, too, is ill," He answered still,

82

The man who swayed her like a shade. "An hour will come when sight of such sweet nook Would bring a bitterness too sharp to brook, When brighter eyes have won away his look; For you will fade." Then said she faintly: "O, contrive some way-Some narrow winding turret, quite mine own, To reach a loft where I may grieve alone! It is a slight thing; hence do not, I pray, This last dear fancy slay!" "Such winding ways Fit not your days," Said he, the man of measuring eye; "I must even fashion as my rule declares, To wit: Give space (since life ends unawares) To hale a coffined corpse adown the stairs; For you will die."

Thomas Hardy

83

Her Death And After 'TWAS a death-bed summons, and forth I went By the way of the Western Wall, so drear On that winter night, and sought a gate-The home, by Fate, Of one I had long held dear.

And there, as I paused by her tenement, And the trees shed on me their rime and hoar, I thought of the man who had left her lone-Him who made her his own When I loved her, long before.

The rooms within had the piteous shine The home-things wear which the housewife miss; From the stairway floated the rise and fall Of an infant's call, Whose birth had brought her to this.

Her life was the price she would pay for that whine-For a child by the man she did not love. "But let that rest forever," I said, And bent my tread To the chamber up above. She took my hand in her thin white own, And smiled her thanks--though nigh too weak-And made them a sign to leave us there; Then faltered, ere She could bring herself to speak. "'Twas to see you before I go--he'll condone Such a natural thing now my time's not much-When Death is so near it hustles hence All passioned sense Between woman and man as such! "My husband is absent. As heretofore The City detains him. But, in truth, He has not been kind.... I will speak no blame, But--the child is lame; O, I pray she may reach his ruth! "Forgive past days--I can say no more-Maybe if we'd wedded you'd now repine!... But I treated you ill. I was punished. Farewell! --Truth shall I tell? Would the child were yours and mine! "As a wife I was true. But, such my unease That, could I insert a deed back in Time, I'd make her yours, to secure your care; And the scandal bear,

84

--When I had left, and the swinging trees Rang above me, as lauding her candid say, Another was I. Her words were enough: Came smooth, came rough, I felt I could live my day.

And the penalty for the crime!"

Next night she died; and her obsequies In the Field of Tombs, by the Via renowned, Had her husband's heed. His tendance spent, I often went And pondered by her mound. All that year and the next year whiled, And I still went thitherward in the gloam; But the Town forgot her and her nook, And her husband took Another Love to his home.

And the rumor flew that the lame lone child Whom she wished for its safety child of mine, Was treated ill when offspring came Of the new-made dame, And marked a more vigorous line. A smarter grief within me wrought Than even at loss of her so dear; Dead the being whose soul my soul suffused, Her child ill-used, I helpless to interfere!

One eve as I stood at my spot of thought In the white-stoned Garth, brooding thus her wrong, Her husband neared; and to shun his view By her hallowed mew I went from the tombs among To the Cirque of the Gladiators which faced-That haggard mark of Imperial Rome, Whose Pagan echoes mock the chime Of our Christian time: It was void, and I inward clomb.

Scarce had night the sun's gold touch displaced From the vast Rotund and the neighboring dead When her husband followed; bowed; half-passed, With lip upcast; Then, halting, sullenly said: "It is noised that you visit my first wife's tomb. Now, I gave her an honored name to bear

85

While living, when dead. So I've claim to ask By what right you task My patience by vigiling there? "There's decency even in death, I assume; Preserve it, sir, and keep away; For the mother of my first-born you Show mind undue! --Sir, I've nothing more to say."

A desperate stroke discerned I then-God pardon--or pardon not--the lie; She had sighed that she wished (lest the child should pine Of slights) 'twere mine, So I said: "But the father I. "That you thought it yours is the way of men; But I won her troth long ere your day: You learnt how, in dying, she summoned me? 'Twas in fealty. --Sir, I've nothing more to say, "Save that, if you'll hand me my little maid, I'll take her, and rear her, and spare you toil. Think it more than a friendly act none can; I'm a lonely man, While you've a large pot to boil. "If not, and you'll put it to ball or blade-To-night, to-morrow night, anywhen-I'll meet you here.... But think of it, And in season fit Let me hear from you again."

--Well, I went away, hoping; but nought I heard Of my stroke for the child, till there greeted me A little voice that one day came To my window-frame And babbled innocently:

"My father who's not my own, sends word I'm to stay here, sir, where I belong!" Next a writing came: "Since the child was the fruit Of your passions brute, Pray take her, to right a wrong."

And I did. And I gave the child my love, And the child loved me, and estranged us none. But compunctions loomed; for I'd harmed the dead By what I'd said For the good of the living one.
www.PoemHunter.com - The World's Poetry Archive 86

Thomas Hardy

--Yet though, God wot, I am sinner enough, And unworthy the woman who drew me so, Perhaps this wrong for her darling's good She forgives, or would, If only she could know!

87

Her Dilemma THE two were silent in a sunless church, Whose mildewed walls, uneven paving-stones, And wasted carvings passed antique research; And nothing broke the clock's dull monotones.

Leaning against a wormy poppy-head, So wan and worn that he could scarcely stand, --For he was soon to die,--he softly said, "Tell me you love me!"--holding hard her hand.

She would have given a world to breathe "yes" truly, So much his life seemed hanging on her mind, And hence she lied, her heart persuaded throughly, 'Twas worth her soul to be a moment kind. But the sad need thereof, his nearing death, So mocked humanity that she shamed to prize A world conditioned thus, or care for breath Where Nature such dilemmas could devise.

Thomas Hardy

88

Her Immortality UPON a noon I pilgrimed through A pasture, mile by mile, Unto the place where I last saw My dead Love's living smile.

And sorrowing I lay me down Upon the heated sod: It seemed as if my body pressed The very ground she trod.

I lay, and thought; and in a trance She came and stood me by-The same, even to the marvellous ray That used to light her eye. "You draw me, and I come to you, My faithful one," she said, In voice that had the moving tone It bore in maidenhead.

She said: "'Tis seven years since I died: Few now remember me; My husband clasps another bride; My children mothers she. My brethren, sisters, and my friends Care not to meet my sprite: Who prized me most I did not know Till I passed down from sight." I said: "My days are lonely here; I need thy smile alway: I'll use this night my ball or blade, And join thee ere the day."

A tremor stirred her tender lips, Which parted to dissuade: "That cannot be, O friend," she cried; "Think, I am but a Shade! "A Shade but in its mindful ones Has immortality; By living, me you keep alive, By dying you slay me.

"In you resides my single power Of sweet continuance here; On your fidelity I count Through many a coming year."

--I started through me at her plight, So suddenly confessed:

89

Dismissing late distaste for life, I craved its bleak unrest.

"I will not die, my One of all!-To lengthen out thy days I'll guard me from minutest harms That may invest my ways!"

She smiled and went. Since then she comes Oft when her birth-moon climbs, Or at the seasons' ingresses Or anniversary times; But grows my grief. When I surcease, Through whom alone lives she, Ceases my Love, her words, her ways, Never again to be!

Thomas Hardy

90

Her Initals UPON a poet's page I wrote Of old two letters of her name; Part seemed she of the effulgent thought Whence that high singer's rapture came. --When now I turn the leaf the same Immortal light illumes the lay But from the letters of her name The radiance has died away. Thomas Hardy

91

Her Initials Upon a poet’s page I wrote Of old two letters of her name; Part seemed she of the effulgent thought Whence that high singer’s rapture came. —When now I turn the leaf the same Immortal light illumes the lay But from the letters of her name The radiance has died away. Thomas Hardy

92

Her Late Husband (King's-Hintock, 182-.) "No--not where I shall make my own; But dig his grave just by The woman's with the initialed stone As near as he can lie After whose death he seemed to ail, Though none considered why. "And when I also claim a nook, And your feet tread me in, Bestow me, under my old name, Among my kith and kin, That strangers gazing may not dream I did a husband win."

"Widow, your wish shall be obeyed; Though, thought I, certainly You'd lay him where your folk are laid, And your grave, too, will be, As custom hath it; you to right, And on the left hand he." "Aye, sexton; such the Hintock rule, And none has said it nay; But now it haps a native here Eschews that ancient way . . . And it may be, some Christmas night, When angels walk, they'll say: "'O strange interment! Civilized lands Afford few types thereof; Here is a man who takes his rest Beside his very Love, Beside the one who was his wife In our sight up above!'" Thomas Hardy

93

Her Reproach Con the dead page as 'twere live love: press on! Cold wisdom's words will ease thy track for thee; Aye, go; cast off sweet ways, and leave me wan To biting blasts that are intent on me.

But if thy object Fame's far summits be, Whose inclines many a skeleton o'erlies That missed both dream and substance, stop and see How absence wears these cheeks and dims these eyes! It surely is far sweeter and more wise To water love, than toil to leave anon A name whose glory-gleam will but advise Invidious minds to quench it with their own, And over which the kindliest will but stay A moment, musing, "He, too, had his day!" Thomas Hardy

94

Heredity I am the family face; Flesh perishes, I live on, Projecting trait and trace Through time to times anon, And leaping from place to place Over oblivion.

The years-heired feature that can In curve and voice and eye Despise the human span Of durance -- that is I; The eternal thing in man, That heeds no call to die Thomas Hardy

95

His Immortality I I saw a dead man's finer part Shining within each faithful heart Of those bereft. Then said I: "This must be His immortality." II I looked there as the seasons wore, And still his soul continuously upbore Its life in theirs. But less its shine excelled Than when I first beheld. III His fellow-yearsmen passed, and then In later hearts I looked for him again; And found him--shrunk, alas! into a thin And spectral mannikin. IV Lastly I ask--now old and chill If aught of him remain unperished still; And find, in me alone, a feeble spark, Dying amid the dark. Thomas Hardy

96

I have lived with Shades I I have lived with Shades so long, So long have talked to them, I sped to street and throng, That sometimes they In their dim style Will pause awhile To hear my say; II And take me by the hand, And lead me through their rooms In the To-Be, where Dooms Half-wove and shapeless stand: And show from there The dwindled dust And rot and rust Of things that were. III "Now turn," they said to me One day: "Look whence we came, And signify his name Who gazes thence at thee" --- "Nor name nor race Know I, or can," I said, "Of man So commonplace." IV "He moves me not at all: I note no ray or jot Of rareness in his lot, Or star exceptional. Into the dim Dead throngs around He'll sink, nor sound Be left of him." V "Yet," said they, "his frail speech, Hath accents pitched like thine -Thy mould and his define A likeness each to each -But go! Deep pain Alas, would be His name to thee,

97

And told in vain!" Thomas Hardy

98

I Look Into My Glass I LOOK into my glass, And view my wasting skin, And say, "Would God it came to pass My heart had shrunk as thin!" For then, I, undistrest By hearts grown cold to me, Could lonely wait my endless rest With equanimity.

Thomas Hardy

But Time, to make me grieve, Part steals, lets part abide; And shakes this fragile frame at eve With throbbings of noontide.

99

I said to Love I said to Love, "It is not now as in old days When men adored thee and thy ways All else above; Named thee the Boy, the Bright, the One Who spread a heaven beneath the sun," I said to Love.

I said to him, "We now know more of thee than then; We were but weak in judgment when, With hearts abrim, We clamoured thee that thou would'st please Inflict on us thine agonies," I said to him. I said to Love, "Thou art not young, thou art not fair, No elfin darts, no cherub air, Nor swan, nor dove Are thine; but features pitiless, And iron daggers of distress," I said to Love.

"Depart then, Love! Man's race shall perish, threatenest thou, WIthout thy kindling coupling-vow? The age to come the man of now Know nothing of? We fear not such a threat from thee; We are too old in apathy! Mankind shall cease.. So let it be," I said to Love. Thomas Hardy

100

I Said to Love. I said to Love, "It is not now as in old days When men adored thee and thy ways All else above; Named thee the Boy, the Bright, the One Who spread a heaven beneath the sun," I said to Love.

I said to him, "We now know more of thee than then; We were but weak in judgment when, With hearts abrim, We clamoured thee that thou would'st please Inflict on us thine agonies," I said to him. I said to Love, "Thou art not young, thou art not fair, No faery darts, no cherub air, Nor swan, nor dove Are thine; but features pitiless, And iron daggers of distress," I said to Love.

"Depart then, Love! . . . - Man's race shall end, dost threaten thou? The age to come the man of now Know nothing of? We fear not such a threat from thee; We are too old in apathy! Mankind shall cease.--So let it be," I said to Love. Thomas Hardy

101

In A Eweleaze Near Weatherbury THE years have gathered grayly Since I danced upon this leaze With one who kindled gayly Love's fitful ecstasies! But despite the term as teacher, I remain what I was then In each essential feature Of the fantasies of men.

Yet I note the little chisel Of ever-napping Time, Defacing ghast and grizzel The blazon of my prime. When at night he thinks me sleeping, I feel him boring sly Within my bones, and heaping Quaintest pains for by-and-by. Still, I'd go the world with Beauty, I would laugh with her and sing, I would shun divinest duty To resume her worshipping. But she'd scorn my brave endeavor, She would not balm the breeze By murmuring, "Thine for ever!" As she did upon this leaze.

Thomas Hardy

102

In a Museum I Here's the mould of a musical bird long passed from light, Which over the earth before man came was winging; There's a contralto voice I heard last night, That lodges with me still in its sweet singing. II Such a dream is Time that the coo of this ancient bird Has perished not, but is blent, or will be blending Mid visionless wilds of space with the voice that I heard, In the full-fuged song of the universe unending. Thomas Hardy

103

In a Wood In a Wood Pale beech and pine-tree blue, Set in one clay, Bough to bough cannot you Bide out your day? When the rains skim and skip, Why mar sweet comradeship, Blighting with poison-drip Neighborly spray? Heart-halt and spirit-lame, City-opprest, Unto this wood I came As to a nest; Dreaming that sylvan peace Offered the harrowed ease— Nature a soft release From men’s unrest. But, having entered in, Great growths and small Show them to men akin— Combatants all! Sycamore shoulders oak, Bines the slim sapling yoke, Ivy-spun halters choke Elms stout and tall.

Touches from ash, O wych, Sting you like scorn! You, too, brave hollies, twitch Sidelong from thorn. Even the rank poplars bear Illy a rival’s air, Cankering in black despair If overborne.

Since, then, no grace I find Taught me of trees, Turn I back to my kind, Worthy as these. There at least smiles abound, There discourse trills around, There, now and then, are found Life-loyalties. Thomas Hardy

104

In A Wook PALE beech and pine-tree blue, Set in one clay, Bough to bough cannot you Bide out your day? When the rains skim and skip, Why mar sweet comradeship, Blighting with poison-drip Neighborly spray? Heart-halt and spirit-lame, City-opprest, Unto this wood I came As to a nest; Dreaming that sylvan peace Offered the harrowed ease-Nature a soft release From men's unrest. But, having entered in, Great growths and small Show them to men akin-Combatants all! Sycamore shoulders oak, Bines the slim sapling yoke, Ivy-spun halters choke Elms stout and tall.

Touches from ash, O wych, Sting you like scorn! You, too, brave hollies, twitch Sidelong from thorn. Even the rank poplars bear Illy a rival's air, Cankering in black despair If overborne.

Thomas Hardy

Since, then, no grace I find Taught me of trees, Turn I back to my kind, Worthy as these. There at least smiles abound, There discourse trills around, There, now and then, are found Life-loyalties.

105

In Tenebris Wintertime nighs; But my bereavement-pain It cannot bring again: Twice no one dies.

Flower-petals flee; But since it once hath been, No more that severing scene Can harrow me.

Birds faint in dread: I shall not lose old strength In the lone frost's black length: Strength long since fled! Leaves freeze to dun; But friends cannot turn cold This season as of old For him with none.

Tempests may scath; But love cannot make smart Again this year his heart Who no heart hath.

Black is night's cope; But death will not appal One, who past doubtings all, Waits in unhope. Thomas Hardy

106

In The Moonlight "O lonely workman, standing there In a dream, why do you stare and stare At her grave, as no other grave where there?"

"If your great gaunt eyes so importune Her soul by the shine of this corpse-cold moon, Maybe you'll raise her phantom soon!" "Why, fool, it is what I would rather see Than all the living folk there be; But alas, there is no such joy for me!"

"Ah - she was one you loved, no doubt, Through good and evil, through rain and drought, And when she passed, all your sun went out?" "Nay: she was the woman I did not love, Whom all the other were ranked above, Whom during her life I thought nothing of." Thomas Hardy

107

In the Old Theatre, Fiesole (April, 1887) I traced the Circus whose gray stones incline Where Rome and dim Etruria interjoin, Till came a child who showed an ancient coin That bore the image of a Constantine.

She lightly passed; nor did she once opine How, better than all books, she had raised for me In swift perspective Europe's history Through the vast years of Caesar's sceptred line.

For in my distant plot of English loam 'Twas but to delve, and straightway there to find Coins of like impress. As with one half blind Whom common simples cure, her act flashed home In that mute moment to my opened mind The power, the pride, the reach of perished Rome. Thomas Hardy

108

In The Old Theatre, Fiesole. I traced the Circus whose gray stones incline Where Rome and dim Etruria interjoin, Till came a child who showed an ancient coin That bore the image of a Constantine.

She lightly passed; nor did she once opine How, better than all books, she had raised for me In swift perspective Europe's history Through the vast years of Caesar's sceptred line.

For in my distant plot of English loam 'Twas but to delve, and straightway there to find Coins of like impress. As with one half blind Whom common simples cure, her act flashed home In that mute moment to my opened mind The power, the pride, the reach of perished Rome. Thomas Hardy

109

In The Vaulted Way In the vaulted way, where the passage turned To the shadowy corner that none could see, You paused for our parting, - plaintively: Though overnight had come words that burned My fond frail happiness out of me.

And then I kissed you, - despite my thought That our spell must end when reflection came On what you had deemed me, whose one long aim Had been to serve you; that what I sought Lay not in a heart that could breathe such blame.

But yet I kissed you: whereon you again As of old kissed me. Why, why was it so? Do you cleave to me after that light-tongued blow? If you scorned me at eventide, how love then? The thing is dark, Dear. I do not know. Thomas Hardy

110

In Time Of I Only a man harrowing clods In a slow silent walk With an old horse that stumbles and nods Half asleep as they stalk. II Only thin smoke without flame From the heaps of couch-grass; Yet this will go onwards the same Though Dynasties pass. III Yonder a maid and her wight Go whispering by: War's annals will cloud into night Ere their story die. Thomas Hardy

111

In Time Of "The Breaking Of Nations" I Only a man harrowing clods In a slow silent walk With an old horse that stumbles and nods Half asleep as they stalk. II Only thin smoke without flame From the heaps of couch-grass; Yet this will go onwards the same Though Dynasties pass. III Yonder a maid and her wight Go whispering by: War's annals will cloud into night Ere their story die. Thomas Hardy

112

In Time of 'The Breaking of Nations' Only a man harrowing clods In a slow silent walk With an old horse that stumbles and nods Half asleep as they stalk. Only thin smoke without flame From the heaps of couch-grass; Yet this will go onward the same Though Dynasties pass.

Yonder a maid and her wight Come whispering by: War's annals will cloud into night Ere their story die. Thomas Hardy

113

In Vision I Roamed IN vision I roamed the flashing Firmament, So fierce in blazon that the Night waxed wan, As though with an awed sense of such ostent; And as I thought my spirit ranged on and on

In footless traverse through ghast heights of sky, To the last chambers of the monstrous Dome, Where stars the brightest here to darkness die: Then, any spot on our own Earth seemed Home!

Thomas Hardy

And the sick grief that you were far away Grew pleasant thankfulness that you were near, Who might have been, set on some outstep sphere, Less than a Want to me, as day by day I lived unware, uncaring all that lay Locked in that Universe taciturn and drear.

114

Last Words to a Dumb Friend Pet was never mourned as you, Purrer of the spotless hue, Plumy tail, and wistful gaze While you humoured our queer ways, Or outshrilled your morning call Up the stairs and through the hall Foot suspended in its fall While, expectant, you would stand Arched, to meet the stroking hand; Till your way you chose to wend Yonder, to your tragic end. Never another pet for me! Let your place all vacant be; Better blankness day by day Than companion torn away. Better bid his memory fade, Better blot each mark he made, Selfishly escape distress By contrived forgetfulness, Than preserve his prints to make Every morn and eve an ache.

From the chair whereon he sat Sweep his fur, nor wince thereat; Rake his little pathways out Mid the bushes roundabout; Smooth away his talons’ mark From the claw-worn pine-tree bark, Where he climbed as dusk embrowned, Waiting us who loitered round. Strange it is this speechless thing, Subject to our mastering, Subject for his life and food To our gift, and time, and mood; Timid pensioner of us Powers, His existence ruled by ours, Should - by crossing at a breath Into safe and shielded death, By the merely taking hence Of his insignificance Loom as largened to the sense, Shape as part, above man’s will, Of the Imperturbable.

As a prisoner, flight debarred, Exercising in a yard, Still retain I, troubled, shaken, Mean estate, by him forsaken; And this home, which scarcely took Impress from his little look,

115

By his faring to the Dim Grows all eloquent of him.

Housemate, I can think you still Bounding to the window-sill, Over which I vaguely see Your small mound beneath the tree, Showing in the autumn shade That you moulder where you played. Thomas Hardy

116

Lausanne, In Gibbon's Old Garden: 11-12 p.m. (The 110th anniversary of the completion of the "Decline and Fall" at the same hour and place) A spirit seems to pass, Formal in pose, but grave and grand withal: He contemplates a volume stout and tall, And far lamps fleck him through the thin acacias.

Anon the book is closed, With "It is finished!" And at the alley's end He turns, and soon on me his glances bend; And, as from earth, comes speech--small, muted, yet composed. "How fares the Truth now?--Ill? --Do pens but slily further her advance? May one not speed her but in phrase askance? Do scribes aver the Comic to be Reverend still?

"Still rule those minds on earth At whom sage Milton's wormwood words were hurled: 'Truth like a bastard comes into the world Never without ill-fame to him who gives her birth'?" Thomas Hardy

117

Leipzig "OLD Norbert with the flat blue cap-A German said to be-Why let your pipe die on your lap, Your eyes blink absently?"--

--"Ah!... Well, I had thought till my cheek was wet Of my mother--her voice and mien When she used to sing and pirouette, And touse the tambourine "To the march that yon street-fiddler plies; She told me 'twas the same She'd heard from the trumpets, when the Allies Her city overcame.

"My father was one of the German Hussars, My mother of Leipzig; but he, Long quartered here, fetched her at close of the wars, And a Wessex lad reared me. "And as I grew up, again and again She'd tell, after trilling that air, Of her youth, and the battles on Leipzig plain And of all that was suffered there!...

"--'Twas a time of alarms. Three Chiefs-at-arms Combined them to crush One, And by numbers' might, for in equal fight He stood the matched of none. "Carl Schwartzenburg was of the plot, And Blücher, prompt and prow, And Jean the Crown-Prince Bernadotte: Buonaparte was the foe.

"City and plain had felt his reign From the North to the Middle Sea, And he'd now sat down in the noble town Of the King of Saxony.

"October's deep dew its wet gossamer threw Upon Leipzig's lawns, leaf-strewn, Where lately each fair avenue Wrought shade for summer noon. "To westward two dull rivers crept Through miles of marsh and slough, Whereover a streak of whiteness swept-The Bridge of Lindenau.

"Hard by, in the City, the One, care-crossed, Gloomed over his shrunken power;

118

And without the walls the hemming host Waxed denser every hour.

"He had speech that night on the morrow's designs With his chiefs by the bivouac fire, While the belt of flames from the enemy's lines Flared nigher him yet and nigher. "Three sky-lights then from the girdling trine Told, 'Ready!' As they rose Their flashes seemed his Judgment-Sign For bleeding Europe's woes.

"'Twas seen how the French watch-fires that night Glowed still and steadily; And the Three rejoiced, for they read in the sight That the One disdained to flee.... "--Five hundred guns began the affray On next day morn at nine; Such mad and mangling cannon-play Had never torn human line. "Around the town three battle beat, Contracting like a gin; As nearer marched the million feet Of columns closing in.

"The first battle nighed on the low Southern side; The second by the Western way; The nearing of the third on the North was heard; --The French held all at bay. "Against the first band did the Emperor stand; Against the second stood Ney; Marmont against the third gave the order-word: --Thus raged it throughout the day.

"Fifty thousand sturdy souls on those trampled plains and knolls, Who met the dawn hopefully, And were lotted their shares in a quarrel not theirs, Dropt then in their agony. "'O,' the old folks said, 'ye Preachers stern! O so-called Christian time! When will men's swords to ploughshares turn? When come the promised prime?'...

"--The clash of horse and man which that day began, Closed not as evening wore; And the morrow's armies, rear and van, Still mustered more and more.

119

"From the City towers the Confederate Powers Were eyed in glittering lines, And up from the vast a murmuring passed As from a wood of pines. "''Tis well to cover a feeble skill By numbers!' scoffèd He; 'But give me a third of their strength, I'd fill Half Hell with their soldiery!'

"All that day raged the war they waged, And again dumb night held reign, Save that ever upspread from the dark death-bed A miles-wide pant of pain. "Hard had striven brave Ney, the true Bertrand, Victor, and Augereau, Bold Poniatowski, and Lauriston, To stay their overthrow; "But, as in the dream of one sick to death There comes a narrowing room That pens him, body and limbs and breath, To wait a hideous doom,

"So to Napoleon, in the hush That held the town and towers Through these dire nights, a creeping crush Seemed inborne with the hours. "One road to the rearward, and but one, Did fitful Chance allow; 'Twas where the Pleiss' and Elster run-The Bridge of Lindenau.

"The nineteenth dawned. Down street and Platz The wasted French sank back, Stretching long lines across the Flats And on the bridge-way track;

"When there surged on the sky on earthen wave, And stones, and men, as though Some rebel churchyard crew updrave Their sepulchres from below. "To Heaven is blown Bridge Lindenau; Wrecked regiments reel therefrom; And rank and file in masses plough The sullen Elster-Strom.
"A gulf was Lindenau; and dead

120

Were fifties, hundreds, tens; And every current rippled red With Marshal's blood and men's.

"The smart Macdonald swam therein, And barely won the verge; Bold Poniatowski plunged him in Never to re-emerge.

"Then stayed the strife. The remnants wound Their Rhineward way pell-mell; And thus did Leipzig City sound An Empire's passing bell;

"While in cavalcade, with band and blade, Came Marshals, Princes, Kings; And the town was theirs.... Ay, as simple maid, My mother saw these things! "And whenever those notes in the street begin, I recall her, and that far scene, And her acting of how the Allies marched in, And her touse of the tambourine!"

Thomas Hardy

121

Let Me Enjoy <i>Minor Key</i> I Let me enjoy the earth no less Because the all-enacting Might That fashioned forth its loveliness Had other aims than my delight. II About my path there flits a Fair, Who throws me not a word or sign; I'll charm me with her ignoring air, And laud the lips not meant for mine. III From manuscripts of moving song Inspired by scenes and dreams unknown I'll pour out raptures that belong To others, as they were my own. IV And some day hence, towards Paradise And all its blest -- if such should be -I will lift glad, afar-off eyes Though it contain no place for me. Thomas Hardy

122

Lines Spoken by Miss Ada Rehan at the Lyceum Theatre, July 23, 1890, at a performance on behalf of Lady Jeune's Holiday Fund for City Children. BEFORE we part to alien thoughts and aims, Permit the one brief word the occasion claims; --When mumming and grave projects are allied, Perhaps an Epilogue is justified. Our under-purpose has, in truth, to-day Commanded most our musings; least the play: A purpose futile but for your good-will Swiftly responsive to the cry of ill: A purpose all too limited!--to aid Frail human flowerets, sicklied by the shade, In winning some short spell of upland breeze, Or strengthening sunlight on the level leas.

Who has not marked, where the full cheek should be, Incipient lines of lank flaccidity, Lymphatic pallor where the pink should glow, And where the throb of transport, pulses low?-Most tragical of shapes from Pole to Line, O wondering child, unwitting Time's design, Why should Art add to Nature's quandary, And worsen ill by thus immuring thee? --That races can do despite to their own, That Might supernal do indeed condone Wrongs individual for the general ease, Instance the proof in victims such as these. Launched into thoroughfares too thronged before, Mothered by those whose protest is "No more!" Vitalized without option: who shall say That did Life hang on choosing--Yea or Nay-They had not scorned it with such penalty, And nothingness implored of Destiny?

And yet behind the horizon smile serene The down, the cornland, and the stretching green-Space--the child's heaven: scenes which at least ensure Some palliative for ill they cannot cure. Dear friends--now moved by this poor show of ours To make your own long joy in buds and bowers For one brief while the joy of infant eyes, Changing their urban murk to paradise-You have our thanks!--may your reward include More than our thanks, far more: their gratitude.

Thomas Hardy

123

Lines On The Loss Of The "Titanic" In a solitude of the sea Deep from human vanity, And the Pride of Life that planned her, stilly couches she. Steel chambers, late the pyres Of her salamandrine fires, Cold currents thrid, and turn to rhythmic tidal lyres.

Over the mirrors meant To glass the opulent The sea-worm crawls -- grotesque, slimed, dumb, indifferent. Jewels in joy designed To ravish the sensuous mind Lie lightless, all their sparkles bleared and black and blind.

Dim moon-eyed fishes near Gaze at the gilded gear And query: "What does this vaingloriousness down here?" ... Well: while was fashioning This creature of cleaving wing, The Immanent Will that stirs and urges everything Prepared a sinister mate For her -- so gaily great -A Shape of Ice, for the time far and dissociate.

And as the smart ship grew In stature, grace, and hue, In shadowy silent distance grew the Iceberg too. Alien they seemed to be; No mortal eye could see The intimate welding of their later history,

Or sign that they were bent By paths coincident On being anon twin halves of one august event,

Till the Spinner of the Years Said "Now!" And each one hears, And consummation comes, and jars two hemispheres. Thomas Hardy

124

Long Plighted Is it worth while, dear, now, To call for bells, and sally forth arrayed For marriage-rites -- discussed, decried, delayed So many years? Is it worth while, dear, now, To stir desire for old fond purposings, By feints that Time still serves for dallyings, Though quittance nears? Is it worth while, dear, when The day being so far spent, so low the sun, The undone thing will soon be as the done, And smiles as tears?

Is it worth while, dear, when Our cheeks are worn, our early brown is gray; When, meet or part we, none says yea or nay, Or heeds, or cares?

Is it worth while, dear, since We still can climb old Yell'ham's wooded mounds Together, as each season steals its rounds And disappears? Is it worth while, dear, since As mates in Mellstock churchyard we can lie, Till the last crash of all things low and high Shall end the spheres? Thomas Hardy

125

Mad Judy When the hamlet hailed a birth Judy used to cry: When she heard our christening mirth She would kneel and sigh. She was crazed, we knew, and we Humoured her infirmity. When the daughters and the sons Gathered them to wed, And we like-intending ones Danced till dawn was red, She would rock and mutter, "More Comers to this stony shore!"

When old Headsman Death laid hands On a babe or twain, She would feast, and by her brands Sing her songs again. What she liked we let her do, Judy was insane, we knew. Thomas Hardy

126

Men Who March Away <i>Song of the Soldiers</i> What of the faith and fire within us Men who march away Ere the barn-cocks say Night is growing gray, To hazards whence no tears can win us; What of the faith and fire within us Men who march away! Is it a purblind prank, O think you, Friend with the musing eye Who watch us stepping by, With doubt and dolorous sigh? Can much pondering so hoodwink you? Is it a purblind prank, O think you, Friend with the musing eye? Nay. We see well what we are doing, Though some may not see -Dalliers as they be -England's need are we; Her distress would leave us rueing: Nay. We well see what we are doing, Though some may not see! In our heart of hearts believing Victory crowns the just, And that braggarts must Surely bite the dust, Press we to the field ungrieving, In our heart of hearts believing Victory crowns the just.

Hence the faith and fire within us Men who march away Ere the barn-cocks say Night is growing gray, To hazards whence no tears can win us; Hence the faith and fire within us Men who march away. Thomas Hardy

127

Middle-Age Enthusiasms To M. H. WE passed where flag and flower Signalled a jocund throng; We said: "Go to, the hour Is apt!"--and joined the song; And, kindling, laughed at life and care, Although we knew no laugh lay there.

We walked where shy birds stood Watching us, wonder-dumb; Their friendship met our mood; We cried: "We'll often come: We'll come morn, noon, eve, everywhen!" --We doubted we should come again.

We joyed to see strange sheens Leap from quaint leaves in shade; A secret light of greens They'd for their pleasure made. We said: "We'll set such sorts as these!" --We knew with night the wish would cease.

Thomas Hardy

"So sweet the place," we said, "Its tacit tales so dear, Our thoughts, when breath has sped, Will meet and mingle here!"... "Words!" mused we. "Passed the mortal door, Our thoughts will reach this nook no more."

128

Midnight on the Great Western In the third-class seat sat the journeying boy, And the roof-lamp's oily flame Played down on his listless form and face, Bewrapt past knowing to what he was going, Or whence he came.

In the band of his hat the journeying boy Had a ticket stuck; and a string Around his neck bore the key of his box, That twinkled gleams of the lamp's sad beams Like a living thing. What past can be yours, O journeying boy Towards a world uknown, Who calmly, as if incurious quite On all at stake, can undertake This plunge alone?

Knows your soul a sphere, O journeying boy, Our rude realms far above, Whence with spacious vision you mark and mete This region of sin that you find you in, But are not of? Thomas Hardy

129

Mismet He was leaning by a face, He was looking into eyes, And he knew a trysting-place, And he heard seductive sighs; But the face, And the eyes, And the place, And the sighs, Were not, alas, the right ones--the ones meet for him-Though fine and sweet the features, and the feelings all abrim.

II She was looking at a form, She was listening for a tread, She could feel a waft of charm When a certain name was said; But the form, And the tread, And the charm, And name said, Were the wrong ones for her, and ever would be so, While the heritor of the right it would have saved her soul to know! Thomas Hardy

130

Moments of Vision That mirror Which makes of men a transparency, Who holds that mirror And bids us such a breast-bare spectacle see Of you and me?

That mirror Whose magic penetrates like a dart, Who lifts that mirror And throws our mind back on us, and our heart, until we start? That mirror Works well in these night hours of ache; Why in that mirror Are tincts we never see ourselves once take When the world is awake?

That mirror Can test each mortal when unaware; Yea, that strange mirror May catch his last thoughts, whole life foul or fair, Glassing it -- where? Thomas Hardy

131

Mute Opinion I I traversed a dominion Whose spokesmen spake out strong Their purpose and opinion Through pulpit, press, and song. I scarce had means to note there A large-eyed few, and dumb, Who thought not as those thought there That stirred the heat and hum. II When, grown a Shade, beholding That land in lifetime trode, To learn if its unfolding Fulfilled its clamoured code, I saw, in web unbroken, Its history outwrought Not as the loud had spoken, But as the mute had thought. Thomas Hardy

132

My Cicely "ALIVE?"--And I leapt in my wonder, Was faint of my joyance, And grasses and grove shone in garments Of glory to me.

"She lives, in a plenteous well-being, To-day as aforehand; The dead bore the name--though a rare one-The name that bore she." She lived ... I, afar in the city Of frenzy-led factions, Had squandered green years and maturer In bowing the knee To Baals illusive and specious, Till chance had there voiced me That one I loved vainly in nonage Had ceased her to be.

The passion the planets had scowled on, And change had let dwindle, Her death-rumor smartly relifted To full apogee. I mounted a steed in the dawning With acheful remembrance, And made for the ancient West Highway To far Exonb'ry.

Passing heaths, and the House of Long Sieging, I neared the thin steeple That tops the fair fane of Poore's olden Episcopal see; And, changing anew my onbearer, I traversed the downland Whereon the bleak hill-graves of Chieftains Bulge barren of tree; And still sadly onward I followed That Highway the Icen, Which trails its pale ribbon down Wessex O'er lynchet and lea.

Along through the Stour-bordered Forum, Where Legions had wayfared, And where the slow river upglasses Its green canopy,

And by Weatherbury Castle, and therence Through Casterbridge, bore I,

133

To tomb her whose light, in my deeming, Extinguished had He.

No highwayman's trot blew the night-wind To me so life-weary, But only the creak of the gibbets Or wagoners' jee. Triple-ramparted Maidon gloomed grayly Above me from southward, And north the hill-fortress of Eggar, And square Pummerie.

The Nine-Pillared Cromlech, the Bride-streams, The Axe, and the Otter I passed, to the gate of the city Where Exe scents the sea; Till, spent, in the graveacre pausing, I learnt 'twas not my Love To whom Mother Church had just murmured A last lullaby.

--"Then, where dwells the Canon's kinswoman, My friend of aforetime?"-('Twas hard to repress my heart-heavings And new ecstasy.) "She wedded."--"Ah!"--"Wedded beneath her-She keeps the stage-hostel Ten miles hence, beside the great Highway-The famed Lions-Three. "Her spouse was her lackey--no option 'Twixt wedlock and worse things; A lapse over-sad for a lady Of her pedigree!"

I shuddered, said nothing, and wandered To shades of green laurel: Too ghastly had grown those first tidings So brightsome of blee!

For, on my ride hither, I'd halted Awhile at the Lions, And her--her whose name had once opened My heart as a key-I'd looked on, unknowing, and witnessed Her jests with the tapsters, Her liquor-fired face, her thick accents In naming her fee.

134

"O God, why this hocus satiric!" I cried in my anguish: "O once Loved, of fair Unforgotten-That Thing--meant it thee!

"Inurned and at peace, lost but sainted, Where grief I could compass; Depraved--'tis for Christ's poor dependent A cruel decree!" I backed on the Highway; but passed not The hostel. Within there Too mocking to Love's re-expression Was Time's repartee! Uptracking where Legions had wayfared, By cromlechs unstoried, And lynchets, and sepultured Chieftains, In self-colloquy, A feeling stirred in me and strengthened That she was not my Love, But she of the garth, who lay rapt in Her long reverie.

And thence till to-day I persuade me That this was the true one; That Death stole intact her young dearness And innocency. Frail-witted, illuded they call me; I may be. 'Tis better To dream than to own the debasement Of sweet Cicely. Moreover I rate it unseemly To hold that kind Heaven Could work such device--to her ruin And my misery.

So, lest I disturb my choice vision, I shun the West Highway, Even now, when the knaps ring with rhythms From blackbird and bee; And feel that with slumber half-conscious She rests in the church-hay, Her spirit unsoiled as in youth-time When lovers were we.

Thomas Hardy

135

My spirit will not haunt the mound My spirit will not haunt the mound Above my breast, But travel, memory-possessed, To where my tremulous being found Life largest, best. My phantom-footed shape will go When nightfall grays Hither and thither along the ways I and another used to know In backward days. And there you'll find me, if a jot You still should care For me, and for my curious air; If otherwise, then I shall not, For you, be there. Thomas Hardy

136

Nature's Questioning WHEN I look forth at dawning, pool, Field, flock, and lonely tree, All seem to look at me Like chastened children sitting silent in a school;

Their faces dulled, constrained, and worn, As though the master's ways Through the long teaching days Their first terrestrial zest had chilled and overborne. And on them stirs, in lippings mere (As if once clear in call, But now scarce breathed at all)-"We wonder, ever wonder, why we find us here! "Has some Vast Imbecility, Mighty to build and blend, But impotent to tend, Framed us in jest, and left us now to hazardry?

"Or come we of an Automaton Unconscious of our pains?... Or are we live remains Of Godhead dying downwards, brain and eye now gone? "Or is it that some high Plan betides, As yet not understood, Of Evil stormed by Good, We the Forlorn Hope over which Achievement strides?"

Thomas Hardy

Thus things around. No answerer I.... Meanwhile the winds, and rains, And Earth's old glooms and pains Are still the same, and gladdest Life Death neighbors nigh.

137

Neutral Tones WE stood by a pond that winter day, And the sun was white, as though chidden of God, And a few leaves lay on the starving sod, --They had fallen from an ash, and were gray. Your eyes on me were as eyes that rove Over tedious riddles solved years ago; And some words played between us to and fro-On which lost the more by our love. The smile on your mouth was the deadest thing Alive enough to have strength to die; And a grin of bitterness swept thereby Like an ominous bird a-wing.... Since then, keen lessons that love deceives, And wrings with wrong, have shaped to me Your face, and the God-curst sun, and a tree, And a pond edged with grayish leaves.

Thomas Hardy

138

Night in the Old Home When the wasting embers redden the chimney-breast, And Life's bare pathway looms like a desert track to me, And from hall and parlour the living have gone to their rest, My perished people who housed them here come back to me. They come and seat them around in their mouldy places, Now and then bending towards me a glance of wistfulness, A strange upbraiding smile upon all their faces, And in the bearing of each a passive tristfulness.

'Do you uphold me, lingering and languishing here, A pale late plant of your once strong stock?' I say to them; 'A thinker of crooked thoughts upon Life in the sere, An on That which consigns men to night after showing the day to them?'

'--O let be the Wherefore! We fevered our years not thus: Take of Life what it grants, without question!' they answer me seemingly. 'Enjoy, suffer, wait: spread the table here freely like us, And, satisfied, placid, unfretting, watch Time away beamingly!' Thomas Hardy

139

No Buyers A Load of brushes and baskets and cradles and chairs Labours along the street in the rain: With it a man, a woman, a pony with whiteybrown hairs. -The man foots in front of the horse with a shambling sway At a slower tread than a funeral train, While to a dirge-like tune he chants his wares, Swinging a Turk's-head brush (in a drum-major's way When the bandsmen march and play).

A yard from the back of the man is the whiteybrown pony's nose: He mirrors his master in every item of pace and pose: He stops when the man stops, without being told, And seems to be eased by a pause; too plainly he's old, Indeed, not strength enough shows To steer the disjointed waggon straight, Which wriggles left and right in a rambling line, Deflected thus by its own warp and weight, And pushing the pony with it in each incline. The woman walks on the pavement verge, Parallel to the man: She wears an apron white and wide in span, And carries a like Turk's-head, but more in nursing-wise: Now and then she joins in his dirge, But as if her thoughts were on distant things, The rain clams her apron till it clings. -So, step by step, they move with their merchandize, And nobody buys. Thomas Hardy

140

On a Fine Morning Whence comes Solace?--Not from seeing What is doing, suffering, being, Not from noting Life's conditions, Nor from heeding Time's monitions; But in cleaving to the Dream, And in gazing at the gleam Whereby gray things golden seem. II Thus do I this heyday, holding Shadows but as lights unfolding, As no specious show this moment With its irised embowment; But as nothing other than Part of a benignant plan; Proof that earth was made for man. Thomas Hardy

141

On an Invitation to the United States I My ardours for emprize nigh lost Since Life has bared its bones to me, I shrink to seek a modern coast Whose riper times have yet to be; Where the new regions claim them free From that long drip of human tears Which peoples old in tragedy Have left upon the centuried years. II For, wonning in these ancient lands, Enchased and lettered as a tomb, And scored with prints of perished hands, And chronicled with dates of doom, Though my own Being bear no bloom I trace the lives such scenes enshrine, Give past exemplars present room, And their experience count as mine. Thomas Hardy

142

On an Invitation to the United States. My ardours for emprize nigh lost Since Life has bared its bones to me, I shrink to seek a modern coast Whose riper times have yet to be; Where the new regions claim them free From that long drip of human tears Which peoples old in tragedy Have left upon the centuried years.

For, wonning in these ancient lands, Enchased and lettered as a tomb, And scored with prints of perished hands, And chronicled with dates of doom, Though my own Being bear no bloom I trace the lives such scenes enshrine, Give past exemplars present room, And their experience count as mine. Thomas Hardy

143

Postponement SNOW-BOUND in woodland, a mournful word, Dropt now and then from the bill of a bird, Reached me on wind-wafts; and thus I heard, Wearily waiting:-"I planned her a nest in a leafless tree, But the passers eyed and twitted me, And said: 'How reckless a bird is he, Cheerily mating!'

"Fear-filled, I stayed me till summer-tide, In lewth of leaves to throne her bride; But alas! her love for me waned and died, Wearily waiting. "Ah, had I been like some I see, Born to an evergreen nesting-tree, None had eyed and twitted me, Cheerily mating!"

Thomas Hardy

144

Revulsion THOUGH I waste watches framing words to fetter Some spirit to mine own in clasp and kiss, Out of the night there looms a sense 'twere better To fail obtaining whom one fails to miss. For winning love we win the risk of losing, And losing love is as one's life were riven; It cuts like contumely and keen ill-using To cede what was superfluously given.

Thomas Hardy

Let me then feel no more the fateful thrilling That devastates the love-worn wooer's frame, The hot ado of fevered hopes, the chilling That agonizes disappointed aim! So may I live no junctive law fulfilling, And my heart's table bear no woman's name.

145

Rom: On the Palatine (April, 1887) We walked where Victor Jove was shrined awhile, And passed to Livia's rich red mural show, Whence, thridding cave and Criptoportico, We gained Caligula's dissolving pile. And each ranked ruin tended to beguile The outer sense, and shape itself as though It wore its marble hues, its pristine glow Of scenic frieze and pompous peristyle.

When lo, swift hands, on strings nigh over-head, Began to melodize a waltz by Strauss: It stirred me as I stood, in Caesar's house, Raised the old routs Imperial lyres had led, And blended pulsing life with lives long done, Till Time seemed fiction, Past and Present one. Thomas Hardy

146

Rome at the Pyramid of Cestius Near the Graves of Shelley and Keats (1887) Who, then, was Cestius, And what is he to me? Amid thick thoughts and memories multitudinous One thought alone brings he. I can recall no word Of anything he did; For me he is a man who died and was interred To leave a pyramid

Whose purpose was exprest Not with its first design, Nor till, far down in Time, beside it found their rest Two countrymen of mine. Cestius in life, maybe, Slew, breathed out threatening; I know not. This I know: in death all silently He does a kindlier thing,

In beckoning pilgrim feet With marble finger high To where, by shadowy wall and history-haunted street, Those matchless singers lie . . .

--Say, then, he lived and died That stones which bear his name Should mark, through Time, where two immortal Shades abide; It is an ample fame. Thomas Hardy

147

Rome: At the Pyramid of Cestius. (Near the graves of Shelley & Keats) Who, then, was Cestius, And what is he to me? Amid thick thoughts and memories multitudinous One thought alone brings he. I can recall no word Of anything he did; For me he is a man who died and was interred To leave a pyramid

Whose purpose was exprest Not with its first design, Nor till, far down in Time, beside it found their rest Two countrymen of mine. Cestius in life, maybe, Slew, breathed out threatening; I know not. This I know: in death all silently He does a kindlier thing,

In beckoning pilgrim feet With marble finger high To where, by shadowy wall and history-haunted street, Those matchless singers lie . . .

--Say, then, he lived and died That stones which bear his name Should mark, through Time, where two immortal Shades abide; It is an ample fame. Thomas Hardy

148

Rome: Building a New Street in the Ancient Quarter (April, 1887) These numbered cliffs and gnarls of masonry Outskeleton Time's central city, Rome; Whereof each arch, entablature, and dome Lies bare in all its gaunt anatomy. And cracking frieze and rotten metope Express, as though they were an open tome Top-lined with caustic monitory gnome; "Dunces, Learn here to spell Humanity!"

And yet within these ruins' very shade The singing workmen shape and set and join Their frail new mansion's stuccoed cove and quoin With no apparent sense that years abrade, Though each rent wall their feeble works invade Once shamed all such in power of pier and groin. Thomas Hardy

149

Rome: Building a New Street in the Ancient Quarter. These numbered cliffs and gnarls of masonry Outskeleton Time's central city, Rome; Whereof each arch, entablature, and dome Lies bare in all its gaunt anatomy. And cracking frieze and rotten metope Express, as though they were an open tome Top-lined with caustic monitory gnome; "Dunces, Learn here to spell Humanity!"

And yet within these ruins' very shade The singing workmen shape and set and join Their frail new mansion's stuccoed cove and quoin With no apparent sense that years abrade, Though each rent wall their feeble works invade Once shamed all such in power of pier and groin. Thomas Hardy

150

Rome: On the Palatine. We walked where Victor Jove was shrined awhile, And passed to Livia's rich red mural show, Whence, thridding cave and Criptoportico, We gained Caligula's dissolving pile. And each ranked ruin tended to beguile The outer sense, and shape itself as though It wore its marble hues, its pristine glow Of scenic frieze and pompous peristyle.

When lo, swift hands, on strings nigh over-head, Began to melodize a waltz by Strauss: It stirred me as I stood, in Caesar's house, Raised the old routs Imperial lyres had led, And blended pulsing life with lives long done, Till Time seemed fiction, Past and Present one. Thomas Hardy

151

Rome: The Vatican--Sala Delle Muse (1887) I sat in the Muses' Hall at the mid of the day, And it seemed to grow still, and the people to pass away, And the chiselled shapes to combine in a haze of sun, Till beside a Carrara column there gleamed forth One. She was nor this nor that of those beings divine, But each and the whole--an essence of all the Nine; With tentative foot she neared to my halting-place, A pensive smile on her sweet, small, marvellous face. "Regarded so long, we render thee sad?" said she. "Not you," sighed I, "but my own inconstancy! I worship each and each; in the morning one, And then, alas! another at sink of sun.

"To-day my soul clasps Form; but where is my troth Of yesternight with Tune: can one cleave to both?" - "Be not perturbed," said she. "Though apart in fame, As I and my sisters are one, those, too, are the same.

- "But my loves go further--to Story, and Dance, and Hymn, The lover of all in a sun-sweep is fool to whim Is swayed like a river-weed as the ripples run!" - "Nay, wight, thou sway'st not. These are but phases of one; "And that one is I; and I am projected from thee, One that out of thy brain and heart thou causest to be Extern to thee nothing. Grieve not, nor thyself becall, Woo where thou wilt; and rejoice thou canst love at all! Thomas Hardy

152

Rome: The Vatican-Sala Delle Muse. I sat in the Muses' Hall at the mid of the day, And it seemed to grow still, and the people to pass away, And the chiselled shapes to combine in a haze of sun, Till beside a Carrara column there gleamed forth One. She was nor this nor that of those beings divine, But each and the whole--an essence of all the Nine; With tentative foot she neared to my halting-place, A pensive smile on her sweet, small, marvellous face. "Regarded so long, we render thee sad?" said she. "Not you," sighed I, "but my own inconstancy! I worship each and each; in the morning one, And then, alas! another at sink of sun.

"To-day my soul clasps Form; but where is my troth Of yesternight with Tune: can one cleave to both?" - "Be not perturbed," said she. "Though apart in fame, As I and my sisters are one, those, too, are the same.

- "But my loves go further--to Story, and Dance, and Hymn, The lover of all in a sun-sweep is fool to whim Is swayed like a river-weed as the ripples run!" - "Nay, wight, thou sway'st not. These are but phases of one; "And that one is I; and I am projected from thee, One that out of thy brain and heart thou causest to be Extern to thee nothing. Grieve not, nor thyself becall, Woo where thou wilt; and rejoice thou canst love at all! Thomas Hardy

153

San Sebastian With Thoughts of Sergeant M---- (Pensioner), who died 185"WHY, Sergeant, stray on the Ivel Way, As though at home there were spectres rife? From first to last 'twas a proud career! And your sunny years with a gracious wife Have brought you a daughter dear.

"I watched her to-day; a more comely maid, As she danced in her muslin bowed with blue, Round a Hintock maypole never gayed." --"Aye, aye; I watched her this day, too, As it happens," the Sergeant said. "My daughter is now," he again began, "Of just such an age as one I knew When we of the Line, in the Foot-Guard van, On an August morning--a chosen few-Stormed San Sebastian.

"She's a score less three; so about was she-The maiden I wronged in Peninsular days.... You may prate of your prowess in lusty times, But as years gnaw inward you blink your bays, And see too well your crimes!

"We'd stormed it at night, by the vlanker-light Of burning towers, and the mortar's boom: We'd topped the breach but had failed to stay, For our files were misled by the baffling gloom; And we said we'd storm by day. "So, out of the trenches, with features set, On that hot, still morning, in measured pace, Our column climbed; climbed higher yet, Past the fauss'bray, scarp, up the curtain-face, And along the parapet. "From the batteried hornwork the cannoneers Hove crashing balls of iron fire; On the shaking gap mount the volunteers In files, and as they mount expire Amid curses, groans, and cheers.

"Five hours did we storm, five hours re-form, As Death cooled those hot blood pricked on; Till our cause was helped by a woe within; They swayed from the summit we'd leapt upon, And madly we entered in. "On end for plunder, 'mid rain and thunder That burst with the lull of our cannonade,

154

We vamped the streets in the stifling air-Our hunger unsoothed, our thirst unstayed-And ransacked the buildings there.

"Down the stony steps of the house-fronts white We rolled rich puncheons of Spanish grape, Till at length, with the fire of the wine alight, I saw at a doorway a fair fresh shape-A woman, a sylph, or sprite. "Afeard she fled, and with heated head I pursued to the chamber she called her own; --When might is right no qualms deter, And having her helpless and alone I wreaked my lust on her. "She raised her beseeching eyes to me, And I heard the words of prayer she sent In her own soft language.... Seemingly I copied those eyes for my punishment In begetting the girl you see!

"So, to-day I stand with a God-set brand Like Cain's, when he wandered from kindred's ken.... I served through the war that made Europe free; I wived me in peace-year. But, hid from men, I bear that mark on me. "And I nightly stray on the Ivel Way As though at home there were spectres rife; I delight me not in my proud career; And 'tis coals of fire that a gracious wife Should have brought me a daughter dear!"

Thomas Hardy

155

Sapphic Fragment "Thou shalt be--Nothing."--Omar Khayyam. "Tombless, with no remembrance."--W. Shakespeare. Dead shalt thou lie; and nought Be told of thee or thought, For thou hast plucked not of the Muses' tree: And even in Hades' halls Amidst thy fellow-thralls No friendly shade thy shade shall company! Thomas Hardy

156

Satires of Circumstance in Fifteen Glimpses VIII: In the St He enters, and mute on the edge of a chair Sits a thin-faced lady, a stranger there, A type of decayed gentility; And by some small signs he well can guess That she comes to him almost breakfastless. "I have called -- I hope I do not err -I am looking for a purchaser Of some score volumes of the works Of eminent divines I own, -Left by my father -- though it irks My patience to offer them." And she smiles As if necessity were unknown; "But the truth of it is that oftenwhiles I have wished, as I am fond of art, To make my rooms a little smart, And these old books are so in the way." And lightly still she laughs to him, As if to sell were a mere gay whim, And that, to be frank, Life were indeed To her not vinegar and gall, But fresh and honey-like; and Need No household skeleton at all.

Thomas Hardy

157

She At His Funeral THEY bear him to his resting-place-In slow procession sweeping by; I follow at a stranger's space; His kindred they, his sweetheart I. Unchanged my gown of garish dye, Though sable-sad is their attire; But they stand round with griefless eye, Whilst my regret consumes like fire! Thomas Hardy

158

She Hears the Storm There was a time in former years-While my roof-tree was his-When I should have been distressed by fears At such a night as this! I should have murmured anxiously, 'The prickling rain strikes cold; His road is bare of hedge or tree, And he is getting old.' But now the fitful chimney-roar, The drone of Thorncombe trees, The Froom in flood upon the moor, The mud of Mellstock Leaze, The The The The

And what they mean to wayfarers, I scarcely heed or mind; He has won that storm-tight roof of hers Which Earth grants all her kind. Thomas Hardy

candle slanting sooty-wick'd, thuds upon the thatch, eaves drops on the window flicked, clanking garden-hatch,

159

She, at His Funeral They bear him to his resting-place— In slow procession sweeping by; I follow at a stranger’s space; His kindred they, his sweetheart I. Unchanged my gown of garish dye, Though sable-sad is their attire; But they stand round with griefless eye, Whilst my regret consumes like fire! Thomas Hardy

160

She, To Him I WHEN you shall see me lined by tool of Time, My lauded beauties carried off from me, My eyes no longer stars as in their prime, My name forgot of Maiden Fair and Free;

When in your being heart concedes to mind, And judgment, though you scarce its process know, Recalls the excellencies I once enshrined, And you are irked that they have withered so: Remembering that with me lies not the blame, That Sportsman Time but rears his brood to kill, Knowing me in my soul the very same-One who would die to spare you touch of ill!-Will you not grant to old affection's claim The hand of friendship down Life's sunless hill?

Thomas Hardy

161

She, To Him III I WILL be faithful to thee; aye, I will! And Death shall choose me with a wondering eye That he did not discern and domicile One his by right ever since that last Good-bye! I have no care for friends, or kin, or prime Of manhood who deal gently with me here; Amid the happy people of my time Who work their love's fulfilment, I appear

Numb as a vane that cankers on its point, True to the wind that kissed ere canker came; Despised by souls of Now, who would disjoint The mind from memory, and make Life all aim, My old dexterities of hue quite gone, And nothing left for Love to look upon.

Thomas Hardy

162

She, To Him IV THIS love puts all humanity from me; I can but maledict her, pray her dead, For giving love and getting love of thee-Feeding a heart that else mine own had fed! How much I love I know not, life not known, Save as some unit I would add love by; But this I know, my being is but thine own-Fused from its separateness by ecstasy.

Thomas Hardy

And thus I grasp thy amplitudes, of her Ungrasped, though helped by nigh-regarding eyes; Canst thou then hate me as an envier Who see unrecked what I so dearly prize? Believe me, Lost One, Love is lovelier The more it shapes its moans in selfish-wise.

163

She, to Him, I When you shall see me lined by tool of Time, My lauded beauties carried off from me, My eyes no longer stars as in their prime, My name forgot of Maiden Fair and Free;

When in your being heart concedes to mind, And judgment, though you scarce its process know, Recalls the excellencies I once enshrined, And you are irked that they have withered so: Remembering that with me lies not the blame, That Sportsman Time but rears his brood to kill, Knowing me in my soul the very same— One who would die to spare you touch of ill!— Will you not grant to old affection’s claim The hand of friendship down Life’s sunless hill? Thomas Hardy

164

She, to Him, II Perhaps, long hence, when I have passed away, Some other’s feature, accent, thought like mine, Will carry you back to what I used to say, And bring some memory of your love’s decline.

Then you may pause awhile and think, “Poor jade!” And yield a sigh to me—as gift benign, Not as the tittle of a debt unpaid To one who could to you her all resign—

And thus reflecting, you will never see That your thin thought, in two small words conveyed, Was no such fleeting phantom-thought to me, But the Whole Life wherein my part was played; And you amid its fitful masquerade A Thought—as I in yours but seem to be. Thomas Hardy

165

She, to Him, III I will be faithful to thee; aye, I will! And Death shall choose me with a wondering eye That he did not discern and domicile One his by right ever since that last Good-bye! I have no care for friends, or kin, or prime Of manhood who deal gently with me here; Amid the happy people of my time Who work their love’s fulfilment, I appear

Numb as a vane that cankers on its point, True to the wind that kissed ere canker came; Despised by souls of Now, who would disjoint The mind from memory, and make Life all aim, My old dexterities of hue quite gone, And nothing left for Love to look upon. Thomas Hardy

166

She, to Him, IV This love puts all humanity from me; I can but maledict her, pray her dead, For giving love and getting love of thee— Feeding a heart that else mine own had fed!

How much I love I know not, life not known, Save as some unit I would add love by; But this I know, my being is but thine own— Fused from its separateness by ecstasy.

And thus I grasp thy amplitudes, of her Ungrasped, though helped by nigh-regarding eyes; Canst thou then hate me as an envier Who see unrecked what I so dearly prize? Believe me, Lost One, Love is lovelier The more it shapes its moans in selfish-wise. Thomas Hardy

167

Shelley's Skylark (The neighbourhood of Leghorn: March, 1887) Somewhere afield here something lies In Earth's oblivious eyeless trust That moved a poet to prophecies A pinch of unseen, unguarded dust

The dust of the lark that Shelley heard, And made immortal through times to be; Though it only lived like another bird, And knew not its immortality. Lived its meek life; then, one day, fell A little ball of feather and bone; And how it perished, when piped farewell, And where it wastes, are alike unknown.

Maybe it rests in the loam I view, Maybe it throbs in a myrtle's green, Maybe it sleeps in the coming hue Of a grape on the slopes of yon inland scene. Go find it, faeries, go and find That tiny pinch of priceless dust, And bring a casket silver-lined, And framed of gold that gems encrust; And we will lay it safe therein, And consecrate it to endless time; For it inspired a bard to win Ecstatic heights in thought and rhyme. Thomas Hardy

168

Shelley's Skylark. Somewhere afield here something lies In Earth's oblivious eyeless trust That moved a poet to prophecies A pinch of unseen, unguarded dust

The dust of the lark that Shelley heard, And made immortal through times to be; Though it only lived like another bird, And knew not its immortality. Lived its meek life; then, one day, fell A little ball of feather and bone; And how it perished, when piped farewell, And where it wastes, are alike unknown.

Maybe it rests in the loam I view, Maybe it throbs in a myrtle's green, Maybe it sleeps in the coming hue Of a grape on the slopes of yon inland scene. Go find it, faeries, go and find That tiny pinch of priceless dust, And bring a casket silver-lined, And framed of gold that gems encrust; And we will lay it safe therein, And consecrate it to endless time; For it inspired a bard to win Ecstatic heights in thought and rhyme. Thomas Hardy

169

Song From Heine I scanned her picture dreaming, Till each dear line and hue Was imaged, to my seeming, As if it lived anew. Her lips began to borrow Their former wondrous smile; Her fair eyes, faint with sorrow, Grew sparkling as erstwhile. Such tears as often ran not Ran then, my love, for thee; And O, believe I cannot That thou are lost to me! Thomas Hardy

170

Song of Hope O sweet To-morrow! After to-day There will away This sense of sorrow. Then let us borrow Hope, for a gleaming Soon will be streaming, Dimmed by no gray No gray!

While the winds wing us Sighs from The Gone, Nearer to dawn Minute-beats bring us; When there will sing us Larks of a glory Waiting our story Further anon Anon!

Doff the black token, Don the red shoon, Right and retune Viol-strings broken; Null the words spoken In speeches of rueing, The night cloud is hueing, To-morrow shines soon Shines soon! Thomas Hardy

171

Song of the Soldier's Wifes. I At last! In sight of home again, Of home again; No more to range and roam again As at that bygone time? No more to go away from us And stay from us? Dawn, hold not long the day from us, But quicken it to prime! II Now all the town shall ring to them, Shall ring to them, And we who love them cling to them And clasp them joyfully; And cry, "O much we'll do for you Anew for you, Dear Loves!--aye, draw and hew for you, Come back from oversea." III Some told us we should meet no more, Should meet no more; Should wait, and wish, but greet no more Your faces round our fires; That, in a while, uncharily And drearily Men gave their lives--even wearily, Like those whom living tires. IV And now you are nearing home again, Dears, home again; No more, may be, to roam again As at that bygone time, Which took you far away from us To stay from us; Dawn, hold not long the day from us, But quicken it to prime! Thomas Hardy

172

Song of the Soldiers' Wives I At last! In sight of home again, Of home again; No more to range and roam again As at that bygone time? No more to go away from us And stay from us? Dawn, hold not long the day from us, But quicken it to prime! II Now all the town shall ring to them, Shall ring to them, And we who love them cling to them And clasp them joyfully; And cry, "O much we'll do for you Anew for you, Dear Loves!--aye, draw and hew for you, Come back from oversea." III Some told us we should meet no more, Should meet no more; Should wait, and wish, but greet no more Your faces round our fires; That, in a while, uncharily And drearily Men gave their lives--even wearily, Like those whom living tires. IV And now you are nearing home again, Dears, home again; No more, may be, to roam again As at that bygone time, Which took you far away from us To stay from us; Dawn, hold not long the day from us, But quicken it to prime! Thomas Hardy

173

Tess's Lament I I would that folk forgot me quite, Forgot me quite! I would that I could shrink from sight, And no more see the sun. Would it were time to say farewell, To claim my nook, to need my knell, Time for them all to stand and tell Of my day's work as done. II Ah! dairy where I lived so long, I lived so long; Where I would rise up stanch and strong, And lie down hopefully. 'Twas there within the chimney-seat He watched me to the clock's slow beat Loved me, and learnt to call me sweet, And whispered words to me. III And now he's gone; and now he's gone; . . . And now he's gone! The flowers we potted p'rhaps are thrown To rot upon the farm. And where we had our supper-fire May now grow nettle, dock, and briar, And all the place be mould and mire So cozy once and warm. IV And it was I who did it all, Who did it all; 'Twas I who made the blow to fall On him who thought no guile. Well, it is finished--past, and he Has left me to my misery, And I must take my Cross on me For wronging him awhile. V How gay we looked that day we wed, That day we wed! "May joy be with ye!" all o'm said A standing by the durn. I wonder what they say o's now, And if they know my lot; and how

174

She feels who milks my favourite cow, And takes my place at churn! VI It wears me out to think of it, To think of it; I cannot bear my fate as writ, I'd have my life unbe; Would turn my memory to a blot, Make every relic of me rot, My doings be as they were not, And what they've brought to me! Thomas Hardy

175

The Alarm In Memory of one of the Writer's Family who was a Volunteer during the War with Napoleon In a ferny byway Near the great South-Wessex Highway, A homestead raised its breakfast-smoke aloft; The dew-damps still lay steamless, for the sun had made no sky-way, And twilight cloaked the croft. 'Twas hard to realize on This snug side the mute horizon That beyond it hostile armaments might steer, Save from seeing in the porchway a fair woman weep with eyes on A harnessed Volunteer.

In haste he'd flown there To his comely wife alone there, While marching south hard by, to still her fears, For she soon would be a mother, and few messengers were known there In these campaigning years. 'Twas time to be Good-bying, Since the assembly-hour was nighing In royal George's town at six that morn; And betwixt its wharves and this retreat were ten good miles of hieing Ere ring of bugle-horn.

"I've laid in food, Dear, And broached the spiced and brewed, Dear; And if our July hope should antedate, Let the char-wench mount and gallop by the halterpath and wood, Dear, And fetch assistance straight. "As for Buonaparte, forget him; He's not like to land! But let him, Those strike with aim who strike for wives and sons! And the war-boats built to float him; 'twere but wanted to upset him A slat from Nelson's guns!

"But, to assure thee, And of creeping fears to cure thee, If he should be rumored anchoring in the Road, Drive with the nurse to Kingsbere; and let nothing thence allure thee Till we've him safe-bestowed. "Now, to turn to marching matters:-I've my knapsack, firelock, spatters, Crossbelts, priming-horn, stock, bay'net, blackball, clay, Pouch, magazine, flints, flint-box that at every quick-step clatters; ...My heart, Dear; that must stay!"
--With breathings broken

176

Farewell was kissed unspoken, And they parted there as morning stroked the panes; And the Volunteer went on, and turned, and twirled his glove for token, And took the coastward lanes. When above He'th Hills he found him, He saw, on gazing round him, The Barrow-Beacon burning--burning low, As if, perhaps, uplighted ever since he'd homeward bound him; And it meant: Expect the Foe! Leaving the byway, And following swift the highway, Car and chariot met he, faring fast inland; "He's anchored, Soldier!" shouted some: "God save thee, marching thy way, Th'lt front him on the strand!"

He slowed; he stopped; he paltered Awhile with self, and faltered, "Why courting misadventure shoreward roam? To Molly, surely! Seek the woods with her till times have altered; Charity favors home.

"Else, my denying He would come she'll read as lying-Think the Barrow-Beacon must have met my eyes-That my words were not unwareness, but deceit of her, while trying My life to jeopardize. "At home is stocked provision, And to-night, without suspicion, We might bear it with us to a covert near; Such sin, to save a childing wife, would earn it Christ's remission, Though none forgive it here!"

While thus he, thinking, A little bird, quick drinking Among the crowfoot tufts the river bore, Was tangled in their stringy arms, and fluttered, well-nigh sinking, Near him, upon the moor.

He stepped in, reached, and seized it, And, preening, had released it But that a thought of Holy Writ occurred, And Signs Divine ere battle, till it seemed him Heaven had pleased it As guide to send the bird. "O Lord, direct me!... Doth Duty now expect me To march a-coast, or guard my weak ones near?

177

Give this bird a flight according, that I thence know to elect me The southward or the rear." He loosed his clasp; when, rising, The bird--as if surmising-Bore due to southward, crossing by the Froom, And Durnover Great-Field and Fort, the soldier clear advising-Prompted he wist by Whom.

Then on he panted By grim Mai-Don, and slanted Up the steep Ridge-way, hearkening betwixt whiles, Till, nearing coast and harbor, he beheld the shore-line planted With Foot and Horse for miles.

Mistrusting not the omen, He gained the beach, where Yeomen, Militia, Fencibles, and Pikemen bold, With Regulars in thousands, were enmassed to meet the Foemen, Whose fleet had not yet shoaled.

Captain and Colonel, Sere Generals, Ensigns vernal, Were there, of neighbor-natives, Michel, Smith, Meggs, Bingham, Gambier, Cunningham, roused by the hued nocturnal Swoop on their land and kith. But Buonaparte still tarried; His project had miscarried; At the last hour, equipped for victory, The fleet had paused; his subtle combinations had been parried By British strategy.

Thomas Hardy

Homeward returning Anon, no beacons burning, No alarms, the Volunteer, in modest bliss, Te Deum sang with wife and friends: "We praise Thee, Lord, discerning That Thou hast helped in this!"

178

The Bedridden Peasant to an Unknown God Much wonder I--here long low-laid That this dead wall should be Betwixt the Maker and the made, Between Thyself and me! For, say one puts a child to nurse, He eyes it now and then To know if better 'tis, or worse, And if it mourn, and when.

But Thou, Lord, giv'st us men our clay In helpless bondage thus To Time and Chance, and seem'st straightway To think no more of us! That some disaster cleft Thy scheme And tore us wide apart, So that no cry can cross, I deem; For Thou art mild of heart,

And would'st not shape and shut us in Where voice can not he heard: 'Tis plain Thou meant'st that we should win Thy succour by a word. Might but Thy sense flash down the skies Like man's from clime to clime, Thou would'st not let me agonize Through my remaining time;

But, seeing how much Thy creatures bear Lame, starved, or maimed, or blind Thou'dst heal the ills with quickest care Of me and all my kind.

Then, since Thou mak'st not these things be, But these things dost not know, I'll praise Thee as were shown to me The mercies Thou would'st show! Thomas Hardy

179

The Bridge of Lodi (Spring, 1887) I When of tender mind and body I was moved by minstrelsy, And that strain "The Bridge of Lodi" Brought a strange delight to me. II In the battle-breathing jingle Of its forward-footing tune I could see the armies mingle, And the columns cleft and hewn III On that far-famed spot by Lodi Where Napoleon clove his way To his fame, when like a god he Bent the nations to his sway. IV Hence the tune came capering to me While I traced the Rhone and Po; Nor could Milan's Marvel woo me From the spot englamoured so. V And to-day, sunlit and smiling, Here I stand upon the scene, With its saffron walls, dun tiling, And its meads of maiden green, VI Even as when the trackway thundered With the charge of grenadiers, And the blood of forty hundred Splashed its parapets and piers . . . VII Any ancient crone I'd toady Like a lass in young-eyed prime, Could she tell some tale of Lodi At that moving mighty time. VIII So, I ask the wives of Lodi

180

For traditions of that day; But alas! not anybody Seems to know of such a fray. IX And they heed but transitory Marketings in cheese and meat, Till I judge that Lodi's story Is extinct in Lodi's street. X Yet while here and there they thrid them In their zest to sell and buy, Let me sit me down amid them And behold those thousands die . . . XI - Not a creature cares in Lodi How Napoleon swept each arch, Or where up and downward trod he, Or for his memorial March! XII So that wherefore should I be here, Watching Adda lip the lea, When the whole romance to see here Is the dream I bring with me? XIII And why sing "The Bridge of Lodi" As I sit thereon and swing, When none shows by smile or nod he Guesses why or what I sing? . . . XIV Since all Lodi, low and head ones, Seem to pass that story by, It may be the Lodi-bred ones Rate it truly, and not I. XV Once engrossing Bridge of Lodi, Is thy claim to glory gone? Must I pipe a palinody, Or be silent thereupon?

181

XVI

And if here, from strand to steeple, Be no stone to fame the fight, Must I say the Lodi people Are but viewing crime aright?

Nay; I'll sing "The Bridge of Lodi" That long-loved, romantic thing, Though none show by smile or nod he Guesses why and what I sing! Thomas Hardy

182

The Bridge of Lodi. I When of tender mind and body I was moved by minstrelsy, And that strain "The Bridge of Lodi" Brought a strange delight to me. II In the battle-breathing jingle Of its forward-footing tune I could see the armies mingle, And the columns cleft and hewn III On that far-famed spot by Lodi Where Napoleon clove his way To his fame, when like a god he Bent the nations to his sway. IV Hence the tune came capering to me While I traced the Rhone and Po; Nor could Milan's Marvel woo me From the spot englamoured so. V And to-day, sunlit and smiling, Here I stand upon the scene, With its saffron walls, dun tiling, And its meads of maiden green, VI Even as when the trackway thundered With the charge of grenadiers, And the blood of forty hundred Splashed its parapets and piers . . . VII Any ancient crone I'd toady Like a lass in young-eyed prime, Could she tell some tale of Lodi At that moving mighty time. VIII So, I ask the wives of Lodi

183

For traditions of that day; But alas! not anybody Seems to know of such a fray. IX And they heed but transitory Marketings in cheese and meat, Till I judge that Lodi's story Is extinct in Lodi's street. X Yet while here and there they thrid them In their zest to sell and buy, Let me sit me down amid them And behold those thousands die . . . XI - Not a creature cares in Lodi How Napoleon swept each arch, Or where up and downward trod he, Or for his memorial March! XII So that wherefore should I be here, Watching Adda lip the lea, When the whole romance to see here Is the dream I bring with me? XIII And why sing "The Bridge of Lodi" As I sit thereon and swing, When none shows by smile or nod he Guesses why or what I sing? . . . XIV Since all Lodi, low and head ones, Seem to pass that story by, It may be the Lodi-bred ones Rate it truly, and not I. XV Once engrossing Bridge of Lodi, Is thy claim to glory gone? Must I pipe a palinody, Or be silent thereupon?

184

XVI

And if here, from strand to steeple, Be no stone to fame the fight, Must I say the Lodi people Are but viewing crime aright? XVII Nay; I'll sing "The Bridge of Lodi" That long-loved, romantic thing, Though none show by smile or nod he Guesses why and what I sing! Thomas Hardy

185

The Bullfinches Bother Bulleys, let us sing From the dawn till evening! For we know not that we go not When the day's pale pinions fold Unto those who sang of old.

When I flew to Blackmoor Vale, Whence the green-gowned faeries hail, Roosting near them I could hear them Speak of queenly Nature's ways, Means, and moods,--well known to fays. All we creatures, nigh and far (Said they there), the Mother's are: Yet she never shows endeavour To protect from warrings wild Bird or beast she calls her child.

Busy in her handsome house Known as Space, she falls a-drowse; Yet, in seeming, works on dreaming, While beneath her groping hands Fiends make havoc in her bands. How her hussif'ry succeeds She unknows or she unheeds, All things making for Death's taking! --So the green-gowned faeries say Living over Blackmoor way. Come then, brethren, let us sing, From the dawn till evening! For we know not that we go not When the day's pale pinions fold Unto those who sang of old. Thomas Hardy

186

The Burghers THE sun had wheeled from Grey's to Dammer's Crest, And still I mused on that Thing imminent: At length I sought the High-street to the West.

The level flare raked pane and pediment And my wrecked face, and shaped my nearing friend Like one of those the Furnace held unshent. "I've news concerning her," he said. "Attend. They fly to-night at the late moon's first gleam: Watch with thy steel: two righteous thrusts will end "Her shameless visions and his passioned dream. I'll watch with thee, to testify thy wrong-To aid, maybe--Law consecrates the scheme." I started, and we paced the flags along Till I replied: "Since it has come to this I'll do it! But alone. I can be strong."

Three hours past Curfew, when the Froom's mild hiss Reigned sole, undulled by whirr of merchandise, From Pummery-Tout to where the Gibbet is, I crossed my pleasaunce hard by Glyd'path Rise, And stood beneath the wall. Eleven strokes went, And to the door they came, contrariwise, And met in clasp so close I had but bent My lifted blade upon them to have let Their two souls loose upon the firmament.

But something held my arm. "A moment yet As pray-time ere you wantons die!" I said; And then they saw me. Swift her gaze was set

With eye and cry of love illimited Upon her Heart-king. Never upon me Had she thrown look of love so thorough-sped!... At once she flung her faint form shieldingly On his, against the vengeance of my vows; The which o'erruling, her shape shielded he.

Blanked by such love, I stood as in a drowse, And the slow moon edged from the upland nigh, My sad thoughts moving thuswise: "I may house "And I may husband her, yet what am I But licensed tyrant to this bonded pair? Says Charity, Do as ye would be done by."...
187

Hurling my iron to the bushes there, I bade them stay. And, as if brain and breast Were passive, they walked with me to the stair.

Inside the house none watched; and on we prest Before a mirror, in whose gleam I read Her beauty, his,--and mine own mien unblest; Till at her room I turned. "Madam," I said, "Have you the wherewithal for this? Pray speak. Love fills no cupboard. You'll need daily bread."

"We've nothing, sire," said she, "and nothing seek. 'Twere base in me to rob my lord unware; Our hands will earn a pittance week by week." And next I saw she'd piled her raiment rare Within the garde-robes, and her household purse, Her jewels, and least lace of personal wear; And stood in homespun. Now grown wholly hers, I handed her the gold, her jewells all, And him the choicest of her robes diverse. "I'll take you to the doorway in the wall, And then adieu," I to them. "Friends, withdraw." They did so; and she went--beyond recall. And as I paused beneath the arch I saw Their moonlit figures--slow, as in surprise-Descend the slope, and vanish on the haw.

"'Fool,' some will say," I thought. "But who is wise, Save God alone, to weigh my reasons why?" --"Hast thou struck home?" came with the boughs' night-sighs. It was my friend. "I have struck well. They fly, But carry wounds that none can cicatrize." --"Not mortal?" said he. "Lingering--worse," said I.

Thomas Hardy

188

The Caged Thrush Freed and Home Again (Villanelle) "Men know but little more than we, Who count us least of things terrene, How happy days are made to be!

"Of such strange tidings what think ye, O birds in brown that peck and preen? Men know but little more than we! "When I was borne from yonder tree In bonds to them, I hoped to glean How happy days are made to be,

"And want and wailing turned to glee; Alas, despite their mighty mien Men know but little more than we!

"They cannot change the Frost's decree, They cannot keep the skies serene; How happy days are made to be "Eludes great Man's sagacity No less than ours, O tribes in treen! Men know but little more than we How happy days are made to be." Thomas Hardy

189

The Casterbridge Captains THREE captains went to Indian wars, And only one returned: Their mate of yore, he singly wore The laurels all had earned.

At home he sought the ancient aisle Wherein, untrumped of fame, The three had sat in pupilage, And each had carved his name.

The names, rough-hewn, of equal size, Stood on the panel still; Unequal since.--"'Twas theirs to aim, Mine was it to fulfil!"

--"Who saves his life shall lose it, friends!" Outspake the preacher then, Unweeting he his listener, who Looked at the names again.

That he had come and they'd been stayed, 'Twas but the chance of war: Another chance, and they'd sat here, And he had lain afar. Yet saw he something in the lives Of those who'd ceased to live That rounded them with majesty Which living failed to give.

Thomas Hardy

Transcendent triumph in return No longer lit his brain; Transcendence rayed the distant urn Where slept the fallen twain.

190

The Cave of the Unborn I rose at night and visited The Cave of the Unborn, And crowding shapes surrounded me For tidings of the life to be, Who long had prayed the silent Head To speed their advent morn. Their eyes were lit with artless trust; Hope thrilled their every tone: "A place the loveliest, is it not? A pure delight, a beauty-spot Where all is gentle, pure and just And ??violence?? is unknown?"

My heart was anguished for their sake; I could not frame a word; But they descried my sunken face And seemed to read therein, and trace The news which Pity would not break Nor Truth leave unaverred. And as I silently retired I turned and watched them still: And they came helter-skelter out, Driven forward like a rabble rout Into the world they had so desired, By the all-immanent Will. Thomas Hardy

191

The Church-Builder The church flings forth a battled shade Over the moon-blanched sward: The church; my gift; whereto I paid My all in hand and hoard; Lavished my gains With stintless pains To glorify the Lord. I squared the broad foundations in Of ashlared masonry; I moulded mullions thick and thin, Hewed fillet and ogee; I circleted Each sculptured head With nimb and canopy. I called in many a craftsmaster To fix emblazoned glass, To figure Cross and Sepulchure On dossal, boss, and brass. My gold all spent, My jewels went To gem the cups of Mass.

I borrowed deep to carve the screen And raise the ivoried Rood; I parted with my small demesne To make my owings good. Heir-looms unpriced I sacrificed, Until debt-free I stood.

So closed the task. "Deathless the Creed Here substanced!" said my soul: "I heard me bidden to this deed, And straight obeyed the call. Illume this fane, That not in vain I build it, Lord of all!" But, as it chanced me, then and there Did dire misfortunes burst; My home went waste for lack of care, My sons rebelled and curst; Till I confessed That aims the best Were looking like the worst. Enkindled by my votive work No burnng faith I find; The deeper thinkers sneer and smirk, And give my toil no mind;

192

From nod and wink I read they think That I am fool and blind.

My gift to God seems futile, quite; The world moves as erstwhile; And powerful Wrong on feeble Right Tramples in olden style. My faith burns down, I see no crown; But Cares, and Griefs, and Guile. So now, the remedy? Yea, this: I gently swing the door Here, of my fane--no soul to wis-And cross the patterned floor To the rood-screen That stands between The nave and inner chore.

The rich red windows dim the moon, But little light need I; I mount the prie-dieu, lately hewn From woods of rarest dye; Then from below My garment, so, I draw this cord, and tie One end thereof around the beam Midway 'twixt Cross and truss: I noose the nethermost extreme, And in ten seconds thus I journey hence-To that land whence No rumour reaches us.

Well: Here at morn they'll light on one Dangling in mockery Of what he spent his substance on Blindly and uselessly!... "He might," they'll say, "Have built, some way, A cheaper gallows-tree!" Thomas Hardy

193

The Colonel's Soliloquy (Southampton Docks: October, 1899) "The quay recedes. Hurrah! Ahead we go! . . . It's true I've been accustomed now to home, And joints get rusty, and one's limbs may grow More fit to rest than roam.

"But I can stand as yet fair stress and strain; There's not a little steel beneath the rust; My years mount somewhat, but here's to't again! And if I fall, I must. "God knows that for myself I've scanty care; Past scrimmages have proved as much to all; In Eastern lands and South I've had my share Both of the blade and ball.

"And where those villains ripped me in the flitch With their old iron in my early time, I'm apt at change of wind to feel a twitch, Or at a change of clime. "And what my mirror shows me in the morning Has more of blotch and wrinkle than of bloom; My eyes, too, heretofore all glasses scorning, Have just a touch of rheum . . .

"Now sounds 'The Girl I've left behind me,'--Ah, The years, the ardours, wakened by that tune! Time was when, with the crowd's farewell 'Hurrah!' 'Twould lift me to the moon. "But now it's late to leave behind me one Who if, poor soul, her man goes underground, Will not recover as she might have done In days when hopes abound.

"She's waving from the wharfside, palely grieving, As down we draw . . . Her tears make little show, Yet now she suffers more than at my leaving Some twenty years ago. "I pray those left at home will care for her! I shall come back; I have before; though when The Girl you leave behind you is a grandmother, Things may not be as then." Thomas Hardy

194

The Colonel's Solilquy. "The quay recedes. Hurrah! Ahead we go! . . . It's true I've been accustomed now to home, And joints get rusty, and one's limbs may grow More fit to rest than roam.

"But I can stand as yet fair stress and strain; There's not a little steel beneath the rust; My years mount somewhat, but here's to't again! And if I fall, I must. "God knows that for myself I've scanty care; Past scrimmages have proved as much to all; In Eastern lands and South I've had my share Both of the blade and ball.

"And where those villains ripped me in the flitch With their old iron in my early time, I'm apt at change of wind to feel a twitch, Or at a change of clime. "And what my mirror shows me in the morning Has more of blotch and wrinkle than of bloom; My eyes, too, heretofore all glasses scorning, Have just a touch of rheum . . .

"Now sounds 'The Girl I've left behind me,'--Ah, The years, the ardours, wakened by that tune! Time was when, with the crowd's farewell 'Hurrah!' 'Twould lift me to the moon. "But now it's late to leave behind me one Who if, poor soul, her man goes underground, Will not recover as she might have done In days when hopes abound.

"She's waving from the wharfside, palely grieving, As down we draw . . . Her tears make little show, Yet now she suffers more than at my leaving Some twenty years ago. "I pray those left at home will care for her! I shall come back; I have before; though when The Girl you leave behind you is a grandmother, Things may not be as then." Thomas Hardy

195

The Comet at Valbury or Yell'ham I It bends far over Yell'ham Plain, And we, from Yell'ham Height, Stand and regard its fiery train, So soon to swim from sight. II It will return long years hence, when As now its strange swift shine Will fall on Yell'ham; but not then On that sweet form of thine. Thomas Hardy

196

The Contretemps A forward rush by the lamp in the gloom, And we clasped, and almost kissed; But she was not the woman whom I had promised to meet in the thawing brume On that harbour-bridge; nor was I he of her tryst. So loosening from me swift she said: "O why, why feign to be The one I had meant - to whom I have sped To fly with, being so sorrily wed," 'Twas thus and thus that she upbraided me. My assignation had struck upon Some others' like it, I found. And her lover rose on the night anon; And then her husband entered on The lamplit, snowflaked, sloppiness around. "Take her and welcome, man!" he cried: "I wash my hands of her. I'll find me twice as good a bride!" - All this to me, whom he had eyed, Plainly, as his wife's planned deliverer.

And next the lover: "Little I knew, Madam, you had a third! Kissing here in my very view!" - Husband and lover then withdrew. I let them; and I told them not they erred. Why not? Well, there faced she and I Two strangers who'd kissed, or near, Chancewise. To see stand weeping by A woman once embraced, will try The tension of a man the most austere.

So it began; and I was young, She pretty, by the lamp, As flakes came waltzing down among The waves of her clinging hair, that hung Heavily on her temples, dark and damp.

And there alone still stood we two; She once cast off for me, Or so it seemed: while night ondrew, Forcing a parley what should do We twain hearts caught in one catastrophe. In stranded souls a common strait Wakes latencies unknown, Whose impulse may precipitate A life-long leap. The hour was late,

197

And there was the Jersey boat with its funnel agroan. "Is wary walking worth much pother?" It grunted, as still it stayed. "One pairing is as good as another Where is all venture! Take each other, And scrap the oaths that you have aforetime made." - Of the four involved there walks but one On earth at this late day. And what of the chapter so begun? In that odd complex what was done? Well; happiness comes in full to none: Let peace lie on lulled lips: I will not say. Thomas Hardy

198

The Convergence Of The Twain I

In a solitude of the sea Deep from human vanity, And the Pride of Life that planned her, stilly couches she. Steel chambers, late the pyres Of her salamandrine fires, Cold currents thrid, and turn to rhythmic tidal lyres. Over the mirrors meant To glass the opulent The sea-worm crawls-grotesque, slimed, dumb, indifferent. Jewels in joy designed To ravish the sensuous mind Lie lightless, all their sparkles bleared and black and blind. Dim moon-eyed fishes near Gaze at the gilded gear And query: "What does this vaingloriousness down here?" . . . Well: while was fashioning This creature of cleaving wing, The Immanent Will that stirs and urges everything Prepared a sinister mate For her - so gaily great A Shape of Ice, for the time far and dissociate. And as the smart ship grew In stature, grace, and hue, In shadowy silent distance grew the Iceberg too. Alien they seemed to be: IX VIII VII VI V IV III II

199

No mortal eye could see The intimate welding of their later history, Or sign that they were bent by paths coincident On being anon twin halves of one august event, Till the Spinner of the Years Said "Now!" And each one hears, And consummation comes, and jars two hemispheres. XI X

Thomas Hardy

200

The Coquette, and After (Triolets) I For long the cruel wish I knew That your free heart should ache for me While mine should bear no ache for you; For, long--the cruel wish!--I knew How men can feel, and craved to view My triumph--fated not to be For long! . . . The cruel wish I knew That your free heart should ache for me! II At last one pays the penalty The woman--women always do. My farce, I found, was tragedy At last!--One pays the penalty With interest when one, fancy-free, Learns love, learns shame . . . Of sinners two At last ONE pays the penalty The woman--women always do! Thomas Hardy

201

The Dame of Athelhall I "Soul! Shall I see thy face," she said, "In one brief hour? And away with thee from a loveless bed To a far-off sun, to a vine-wrapt bower, And be thine own unseparated, And challenge the world's white glower? II She quickened her feet, and met him where They had predesigned: And they clasped, and mounted, and cleft the air Upon whirling wheels; till the will to bind Her life with his made the moments there Efface the years behind. III Miles slid, and the sight of the port upgrew As they sped on; When slipping its bond the bracelet flew From her fondled arm. Replaced anon, Its cameo of the abjured one drew Her musings thereupon. IV The gaud with his image once had been A gift from him: And so it was that its carving keen Refurbished memories wearing dim, Which set in her soul a throe of teen, And a tear on her lashes' brim. V "I may not go!" she at length upspake, "Thoughts call me back I would still lose all for your dear, dear sake; My heart is thine, friend! But my track I home to Athelhall must take To hinder household wrack!" VI He appealed. But they parted, weak and wan: And he left the shore; His ship diminished, was low, was gone; And she heard in the waves as the daytide wore, And read in the leer of the sun that shone,

202

VII

That they parted for evermore.

She homed as she came, at the dip of eve On Athel Coomb Regaining the Hall she had sworn to leave . . . The house was soundless as a tomb, And she entered her chamber, there to grieve Lone, kneeling, in the gloom. VIII From the lawn without rose her husband's voice To one his friend: "Another her Love, another my choice, Her going is good. Our conditions mend; In a change of mates we shall both rejoice; I hoped that it thus might end! IX "A quick divorce; she will make him hers, And I wed mine. So Time rights all things in long, long years Or rather she, by her bold design! I admire a woman no balk deters: She has blessed my life, in fine. X "I shall build new rooms for my new true bride, Let the bygone be: By now, no doubt, she has crossed the tide With the man to her mind. Far happier she In some warm vineland by his side Than ever she was with me." Thomas Hardy

203

The Dance At The Phoenix TO Jenny came a gentle youth From inland leazes lone; His love was fresh as apple-blooth By Parrett, Yeo, or Tone. And duly he entreated her To be his tender minister, And call him aye her own.

Fair Jenny's life had hardly been A life of modesty; At Casterbridge experience keen Of many loves had she From scarcely sixteen years above: Among them sundry troopers of The King's-Own Cavalry.

But each with charger, sword, and gun, Had bluffed the Biscay wave; And Jenny prized her gentle one For all the love he gave. She vowed to be, if they were wed, His honest wife in heart and head From bride-ale hour to grave.

Wedded they were. Her husband's trust In Jenny knew no bound, And Jenny kept her pure and just, Till even malice found No sin or sign of ill to be In one who walked so decently The duteous helpmate's round.

Two sons were born, and bloomed to men, And roamed, and were as not: Alone was Jenny left again As ere her mind had sought A solace in domestic joys, And ere the vanished pair of boys Were sent to sun her cot. She numbered near on sixty years, And passed as elderly, When, in the street, with flush of fears, On day discovered she, From shine of swords and thump of drum, Her early loves from war had come, The King's Own Cavalry. She turned aside, and bowed her head Anigh Saint Peter's door; "Alas for chastened thoughts!" she said; "I'm faded now, and hoar,

204

And yet those notes--they thrill me through, And those gay forms move me anew As in the years of yore!"... --'Twas Christmas, and the Phoenix Inn Was lit with tapers tall, For thirty of the trooper men Had vowed to give a ball As "Theirs" had done (fame handed down) When lying in the self-same town Ere Buonaparté's fall. That night the throbbing "Soldier's Joy," The measured tread and sway Of "Fancy-Lad" and "Maiden Coy," Reached Jenny as she lay Beside her spouse; till springtide blood Seemed scouring through her like a flood That whisked the years away.

She rose, and rayed, and decked her head To hide her ringlets thin; Upon her cap two bows of red She fixed with hasty pin; Unheard descending to the street, She trod the flags with tune-led feet, And stood before the Inn. Save for the dancers', not a sound Disturbed the icy air; No watchman on his midnight round Or traveller was there; But over All-Saints', high and bright, Pulsed to the music Sirius white, The Wain by Bullstake Square.

She knocked, but found her further stride Checked by a sergeant tall: "Gay Granny, whence come you?" he cried; "This is a private ball." --"No one has more right here than me! Ere you were born, man," answered she, "I knew the regiment all!"

"Take not the lady's visit ill!" Upspoke the steward free; "We lack sufficient partners still, So, prithee let her be!" They seized and whirled her 'mid the maze, And Jenny felt as in the days Of her immodesty.
www.PoemHunter.com - The World's Poetry Archive 205

Hour chased each hour, and night advanced; She sped as shod with wings; Each time and every time she danced-Reels, jigs, poussettes, and flings: They cheered her as she soared and swooped (She'd learnt ere art in dancing drooped From hops to slothful swings). The favorite Quick-step "Speed the Plough"-(Cross hands, cast off, and wheel)-"The Triumph," "Sylph," "The Row-dow dow," Famed "Major Malley's Reel," "The Duke of York's," "The Fairy Dance," "The Bridge of Lodi" (brought from France), She beat out, toe and heel. The "Fall of Paris" clanged its close, And Peter's chime told four, When Jenny, bosom-beating, rose To seek her silent door. They tiptoed in escorting her, Lest stroke of heel or chink of spur Should break her goodman's snore.

The fire that late had burnt fell slack When lone at last stood she; Her nine-and-fifty years came back; She sank upon her knee Beside the durn, and like a dart A something arrowed through her heart In shoots of agony.

Their footsteps died as she leant there, Lit by the morning star Hanging above the moorland, where The aged elm-rows are; And, as o'ernight, from Pummery Ridge To Maembury Ring and Standfast Bridge No life stirred, near or far. Though inner mischief worked amain, She reached her husband's side; Where, toil-weary, as he had lain Beneath the patchwork pied When yestereve she'd forthward crept, And as unwitting, still he slept Who did in her confide.

A tear sprang as she turned and viewed His features free from guile; She kissed him long, as when, just wooed. She chose his domicile.

206

Death menaced now; yet less for life She wished than that she were the wife That she had been erstwhile. Time wore to six. Her husband rose And struck the steel and stone; He glanced at Jenny, whose repose Seemed deeper than his own. With dumb dismay, on closer sight, He gathered sense that in the night, Or morn, her soul had flown.

When told that some too mighty strain For one so many-yeared Had burst her bosom's master-vein, His doubts remained unstirred. His Jenny had not left his side Betwixt the eve and morning-tide: --The King's said not a word.

Thomas Hardy

Well! times are not as times were then, Nor fair ones half so free; And truly they were martial men, The King's-Own Cavalry. And when they went from Casterbridge And vanished over Mellstock Ridge, 'Twas saddest morn to see.

207

The Darkling Thrush The Darkling Thrush I leant upon a coppice gate, When Frost was spectre-gray, And Winter's dregs made desolate The weakening eye of day. The tangled vine-stems scored the sky Like strings of broken lyres, And all mankind that haunted nigh Had sought their household fires.

The land's sharp features seemed to me The Century's corpse outleant, Its crypt the cloudy canopy, The wind its death-lament. The ancient pulse of germ and birth Was shrunken hard and dry, And every spirit upon earth Seemed fervorless as I.

At once a voice arose among The bleak twigs overhead, In a full-throated evensong Of joy illimited. An ancient thrush, frail, gaunt and small, With blast-beruffled plume, Had chosen thus to fling his soul Upon the growing gloom.

So little cause for carolings Of such ecstatic sound Was written on terrestrial things Afar or nigh around, That I could think there trembled through His happy good-night air Some blessed Hope, whereof he knew, And I was unaware. Thomas Hardy

208

The Dead Drummer I They throw in Drummer Hodge, to rest Uncoffined--just as found: His landmark is a kopje-crest That breaks the veldt around; And foreign constellations west Each night above his mound. II Young Hodge the Drummer never knew Fresh from his Wessex home The meaning of the broad Karoo, The Bush, the dusty loam, And why uprose to nightly view Strange stars amid the gloam. III Yet portion of that unknown plain Will Hodge for ever be; His homely Northern breast and brain Grow up a Southern tree. And strange-eyed constellations reign His stars eternally. Thomas Hardy

209

The Dead Drummer. I They throw in Drummer Hodge, to rest Uncoffined--just as found: His landmark is a kopje-crest That breaks the veldt around; And foreign constellations west Each night above his mound. II Young Hodge the Drummer never knew Fresh from his Wessex home The meaning of the broad Karoo, The Bush, the dusty loam, And why uprose to nightly view Strange stars amid the gloam. III Yet portion of that unknown plain Will Hodge for ever be; His homely Northern breast and brain Grow up a Southern tree. And strange-eyed constellations reign His stars eternally. Thomas Hardy

210

The Dead Man Walking They hail me as one living, But don't they know That I have died of late years, Untombed although?

I am but a shape that stands here, A pulseless mould, A pale past picture, screening Ashes gone cold.

Not at a minute's warning, Not in a loud hour, For me ceased Time's enchantments In hall and bower. There was no tragic transit, No catch of breath, When silent seasons inched me On to this death ...

-- A Troubadour-youth I rambled With Life for lyre, The beats of being raging In me like fire. But when I practised eyeing The goal of men, It iced me, and I perished A little then.

When passed my friend, my kinsfolk, Through the Last Door, And left me standing bleakly, I died yet more; And when my Love's heart kindled In hate of me, Wherefore I knew not, died I One more degree.

And if when I died fully I cannot say, And changed into the corpse-thing I am to-day, Yet is it that, though whiling The time somehow In walking, talking, smiling, I live not now. Thomas Hardy

211

The Dream-Follower A dream of mine flew over the mead To the halls where my old Love reigns; And it drew me on to follow its lead: And I stood at her window-panes;

And I saw but a thing of flesh and bone Speeding on to its cleft in the clay; And my dream was scared, and expired on a moan, And I whitely hastened away. Thomas Hardy

212

The Farm Woman's Winter I If seasons all were summers, And leaves would never fall, And hopping casement-comers Were foodless not at all, And fragile folk might be here That white winds bid depart; Then one I used to see here Would warm my wasted heart! II One frail, who, bravely tilling Long hours in gripping gusts, Was mastered by their chilling, And now his ploughshare rusts. So savage winter catches The breath of limber things, And what I love he snatches, And what I love not, brings. Thomas Hardy

213

The Fire at Tranter Sweatley’s The Fire at Tranter Sweatley’s They had long met o’ Zundays—her true love and she— And at junketings, maypoles, and flings; But she bode wi’ a thirtover uncle, and he Swore by noon and by night that her goodman should be Naibor Sweatley—a gaffer oft weak at the knee From taking o’ sommat more cheerful than tea— Who tranted, and moved people’s things. She cried, “O pray pity me!” Nought would he hear; Then with wild rainy eyes she obeyed, She chid when her Love was for clinking off wi’ her. The pa’son was told, as the season drew near To throw over pu’pit the names of the peäir As fitting one flesh to be made.

The wedding-day dawned and the morning drew on; The couple stood bridegroom and bride; The evening was passed, and when midnight had gone The folks horned out, “God save the King,” and anon The two home-along gloomily hied. The lover Tim Tankens mourned heart-sick and drear To be thus of his darling deprived: He roamed in the dark ath’art field, mound, and mere, And, a’most without knowing it, found himself near The house of the tranter, and now of his Dear, Where the lantern-light showed ’em arrived.

The bride sought her cham’er so calm and so pale That a Northern had thought her resigned; But to eyes that had seen her in tide-times of weal, Like the white cloud o’ smoke, the red battlefield’s vail, That look spak’ of havoc behind.

The bridegroom yet laitered a beaker to drain, Then reeled to the linhay for more, When the candle-snoff kindled some chaff from his grain— Flames spread, and red vlankers, wi’ might and wi’ main, And round beams, thatch, and chimley-tun roar. Young Tim away yond, rafted up by the light, Through brimble and underwood tears, Till he comes to the orchet, when crooping thereright In the lewth of a codlin-tree, bivering wi’ fright, Wi’ on’y her night-rail to screen her from sight, His lonesome young Barbree appears. Her cwold little figure half-naked he views Played about by the frolicsome breeze,

214

Her light-tripping totties, her ten little tooes, All bare and besprinkled wi’ Fall’s chilly dews, While her great gallied eyes, through her hair hanging loose, Sheened as stars through a tardle o’ trees. She eyed en; and, as when a weir-hatch is drawn, Her tears, penned by terror afore, With a rushing of sobs in a shower were strawn, Till her power to pour ’em seemed wasted and gone From the heft o’ misfortune she bore.

“O Tim, my own Tim I must call ’ee—I will! All the world ha’ turned round on me so! Can you help her who loved ’ee, though acting so ill? Can you pity her misery—feel for her still? When worse than her body so quivering and chill Is her heart in its winter o’ woe! “I think I mid almost ha’ borne it,” she said, “Had my griefs one by one come to hand; But O, to be slave to thik husbird for bread, And then, upon top o’ that, driven to wed, And then, upon top o’ that, burnt out o’ bed, Is more than my nater can stand!”

Tim’s soul like a lion ’ithin en outsprung— (Tim had a great soul when his feelings were wrung)— “Feel for ’ee, dear Barbree?” he cried; And his warm working-jacket about her he flung, Made a back, horsed her up, till behind him she clung Like a chiel on a gipsy, her figure uphung By the sleeves that around her he tied. Over piggeries, and mixens, and apples, and hay, They lumpered straight into the night; And finding bylong where a halter-path lay, At dawn reached Tim’s house, on’y seen on their way By a naibor or two who were up wi’ the day; But they gathered no clue to the sight.

Then tender Tim Tankens he searched here and there For some garment to clothe her fair skin; But though he had breeches and waistcoats to spare, He had nothing quite seemly for Barbree to wear, Who, half shrammed to death, stood and cried on a chair At the caddle she found herself in. There was one thing to do, and that one thing he did, He lent her some clouts of his own, And she took ’em perforce; and while in ’em she slid, Tim turned to the winder, as modesty bid, Thinking, “O that the picter my duty keeps hid

215

In the tallet he stowed her; there huddied she lay, Shortening sleeves, legs, and tails to her limbs; But most o’ the time in a mortal bad way, Well knowing that there’d be the divel to pay If ’twere found that, instead o’ the elements’ prey, She was living in lodgings at Tim’s.

To the sight o’ my eyes mid be shown!”

“Where’s the tranter?” said men and boys; “where can er be?” “Where’s the tranter?” said Barbree alone. “Where on e’th is the tranter?” said everybod-y: They sifted the dust of his perished roof-tree, And all they could find was a bone. Then the uncle cried, “Lord, pray have mercy on me!” And in terror began to repent. But before ’twas complete, and till sure she was free, Barbree drew up her loft-ladder, tight turned her key— Tim bringing up breakfast and dinner and tea— Till the news of her hiding got vent.

Then followed the custom-kept rout, shout, and flare Of a skimmington-ride through the naiborhood, ere Folk had proof o’ wold Sweatley’s decay. Whereupon decent people all stood in a stare, Saying Tim and his lodger should risk it, and pair: So he took her to church. An’ some laughing lads there Cried to Tim, “After Sweatley!” She said, “I declare I stand as a maiden to-day!” Thomas Hardy

216

The Fire at Tranter Sweatley's They had long met o' Zundays--her true love and she-And at junketings, maypoles, and flings; But she bode wi' a thirtover uncle, and he Swore by noon and by night that her goodman should be Naibor Sweatley--a gaffer oft weak at the knee From taking o' sommat more cheerful than tea-Who tranted, and moved people's things. She cried, "O pray pity me!" Nought would he hear; Then with wild rainy eyes she obeyed, She chid when her Love was for clinking off wi' her. The pa'son was told, as the season drew near To throw over pu'pit the names of the peäir As fitting one flesh to be made. The The The The The

The lover Tim Tankens mourned heart-sick and drear To be thus of his darling deprived: He roamed in the dark ath'art field, mound, and mere, And, a'most without knowing it, found himself near The house of the tranter, and now of his Dear, Where the lantern-light showed 'em arrived.

wedding-day dawned and the morning drew on; couple stood bridegroom and bride; evening was passed, and when midnight had gone folks horned out, "God save the King," and anon two home-along gloomily hied.

The bride sought her cham'er so calm and so pale That a Northern had thought her resigned; But to eyes that had seen her in tide-times of weal, Like the white cloud o' smoke, the red battlefield's vail, That look spak' of havoc behind.

The bridegroom yet laitered a beaker to drain, Then reeled to the linhay for more, When the candle-snoff kindled some chaff from his grain-Flames spread, and red vlankers, wi' might and wi' main, And round beams, thatch, and chimley-tun roar. Young Tim away yond, rafted up by the light, Through brimble and underwood tears, Till he comes to the orchet, when crooping thereright In the lewth of a codlin-tree, bivering wi' fright, Wi' on'y her night-rail to screen her from sight, His lonesome young Barbree appears.

Her cwold little figure half-naked he views Played about by the frolicsome breeze, Her light-tripping totties, her ten little tooes, All bare and besprinkled wi' Fall's chilly dews, While her great gallied eyes, through her hair hanging loose,

217

Sheened as stars through a tardle o' trees.

She eyed en; and, as when a weir-hatch is drawn, Her tears, penned by terror afore, With a rushing of sobs in a shower were strawn, Till her power to pour 'em seemed wasted and gone From the heft o' misfortune she bore.

"O Tim, my own Tim I must call 'ee--I will! All the world ha' turned round on me so! Can you help her who loved 'ee, though acting so ill? Can you pity her misery--feel for her still? When worse than her body so quivering and chill Is her heart in its winter o' woe! "I think I mid almost ha' borne it," she said, "Had my griefs one by one come to hand; But O, to be slave to thik husbird for bread, And then, upon top o' that, driven to wed, And then, upon top o' that, burnt out o' bed, Is more than my nater can stand!"

Tim's soul like a lion 'ithin en outsprung-(Tim had a great soul when his feelings were wrung)-"Feel for 'ee, dear Barbree?" he cried; And his warm working-jacket about her he flung, Made a back, horsed her up, till behind him she clung Like a chiel on a gipsy, her figure uphung By the sleeves that around her he tied. Over piggeries, and mixens, and apples, and hay, They lumpered straight into the night; And finding bylong where a halter-path lay, At dawn reached Tim's house, on'y seen on their way By a naibor or two who were up wi' the day; But they gathered no clue to the sight.

Then tender Tim Tankens he searched here and there For some garment to clothe her fair skin; But though he had breeches and waistcoats to spare, He had nothing quite seemly for Barbree to wear, Who, half shrammed to death, stood and cried on a chair At the caddle she found herself in. There was one thing to do, and that one thing he did, He lent her some clouts of his own, And she took 'em perforce; and while in 'em she slid, Tim turned to the winder, as modesty bid, Thinking, "O that the picter my duty keeps hid To the sight o' my eyes mid be shown!"
In the tallet he stowed her; there huddied she lay,

218

Shortening sleeves, legs, and tails to her limbs; But most o' the time in a mortal bad way, Well knowing that there'd be the divel to pay If 'twere found that, instead o' the elements' prey, She was living in lodgings at Tim's.

"Where's the tranter?" said men and boys; "where can er be?" "Where's the tranter?" said Barbree alone. "Where on e'th is the tranter?" said everybod-y: They sifted the dust of his perished roof-tree, And all they could find was a bone. Then the uncle cried, "Lord, pray have mercy on me!" And in terror began to repent. But before 'twas complete, and till sure she was free, Barbree drew up her loft-ladder, tight turned her key-Tim bringing up breakfast and dinner and tea-Till the news of her hiding got vent.

Then followed the custom-kept rout, shout, and flare Of a skimmington-ride through the naiborhood, ere Folk had proof o' wold Sweatley's decay. Whereupon decent people all stood in a stare, Saying Tim and his lodger should risk it, and pair: So he took her to church. An' some laughing lads there Cried to Tim, "After Sweatley!" She said, "I declare I stand as a maiden to-day!" Thomas Hardy

219

The Ghost of the Past We two kept house, the Past and I, The Past and I; I tended while it hovered nigh, Leaving me never alone. It was a spectral housekeeping Where fell no jarring tone, As strange, as still a housekeeping As ever has been known. As daily I went up the stair, And down the stair, I did not mind the Bygone there -The Present once to me; Its moving meek companionship I wished might ever be, There was in that companionship Something of ecstasy.

It dwelt with me just as it was, Just as it was When first its prospects gave me pause In wayward wanderings, Before the years had torn old troths As they tear all sweet things, Before gaunt griefs had torn old troths And dulled old rapturings.

And then its form began to fade, Began to fade, Its gentle echoes faintlier played At eves upon my ear Than when the autumn's look embrowned The lonely chambers here, The autumn's settling shades embrowned Nooks that it haunted near. And so with time my vision less, Yea, less and less Makes of that Past my housemistress, It dwindles in my eye; It looms a far-off skeleton And not a comrade nigh, A fitful far-off skeleton Dimming as days draw by. Thomas Hardy

220

The Going Why did you give no hint that night That quickly after the morrow's dawn, And calmly, as if indifferent quite, You would close your term here, up and be gone Where I could not follow With wing of swallow To gain one glimpse of you ever anon! Never to bid good-bye Or lip me the softest call, Or utter a wish for a word, while I Saw morning harden upon the wall, Unmoved, unknowing That your great going Had place that moment, and altered all.

Why do you make me leave the house And think for a breath it is you I see At the end of the alley of bending boughs Where so often at dusk you used to be; Till in darkening dankness The yawning blankness Of the perspective sickens me! You were she who abode By those red-veined rocks far West, You were the swan-necked one who rode Along the beetling Beeny Crest, And, reining nigh me, Would muse and eye me, While Life unrolled us its very best.

Why, then, latterly did we not speak, Did we not think of those days long dead, And ere your vanishing strive to seek That time's renewal? We might have said, "In this bright spring weather We'll visit together Those places that once we visited."

Well, well! All's past amend, Unchangeable. It must go. I seem but a dead man held on end To sink down soon. . . . O you could not know That such swift fleeing No soul foreseeing-Not even I--would undo me so! Thomas Hardy

221

The Going of the Battery Wives. (Lament) I O it was sad enough, weak enough, mad enough Light in their loving as soldiers can be First to risk choosing them, leave alone losing them Now, in far battle, beyond the South Sea! . . . II - Rain came down drenchingly; but we unblenchingly Trudged on beside them through mirk and through mire, They stepping steadily--only too readily! Scarce as if stepping brought parting-time nigher. III Great guns were gleaming there, living things seeming there, Cloaked in their tar-cloths, upmouthed to the night; Wheels wet and yellow from axle to felloe, Throats blank of sound, but prophetic to sight. IV Gas-glimmers drearily, blearily, eerily Lit our pale faces outstretched for one kiss, While we stood prest to them, with a last quest to them Not to court perils that honour could miss. V Sharp were those sighs of ours, blinded these eyes of ours, When at last moved away under the arch All we loved. Aid for them each woman prayed for them, Treading back slowly the track of their march. VI Someone said: "Nevermore will they come: evermore Are they now lost to us." O it was wrong! Though may be hard their ways, some Hand will guard their ways, Bear them through safely, in brief time or long. VII - Yet, voices haunting us, daunting us, taunting us, Hint in the night-time when life beats are low Other and graver things . . . Hold we to braver things, Wait we, in trust, what Time's fulness shall show. Thomas Hardy

222

The Going of the Battery, Wives' Lament I O it was sad enough, weak enough, mad enough Light in their loving as soldiers can be First to risk choosing them, leave alone losing them Now, in far battle, beyond the South Sea! . . . II - Rain came down drenchingly; but we unblenchingly Trudged on beside them through mirk and through mire, They stepping steadily--only too readily! Scarce as if stepping brought parting-time nigher. III Great guns were gleaming there, living things seeming there, Cloaked in their tar-cloths, upmouthed to the night; Wheels wet and yellow from axle to felloe, Throats blank of sound, but prophetic to sight. IV Gas-glimmers drearily, blearily, eerily Lit our pale faces outstretched for one kiss, While we stood prest to them, with a last quest to them Not to court perils that honour could miss. V Sharp were those sighs of ours, blinded these eyes of ours, When at last moved away under the arch All we loved. Aid for them each woman prayed for them, Treading back slowly the track of their march. VI Someone said: "Nevermore will they come: evermore Are they now lost to us." O it was wrong! Though may be hard their ways, some Hand will guard their ways, Bear them through safely, in brief time or long. VII - Yet, voices haunting us, daunting us, taunting us, Hint in the night-time when life beats are low Other and graver things . . . Hold we to braver things, Wait we, in trust, what Time's fulness shall show. Thomas Hardy

223

The House of Hospitalities Here we broached the Christmas barrel, Pushed up the charred log-ends; Here we sang the Christmas carol, And called in friends. Time has tired me since we met here When the folk now dead were young, And the viands were outset here And quaint songs sung. And the worm has bored the viol That used to lead the tune, Rust eaten out the dial That struck night's noon.

Now no Christmas brings in neighbours, And the New Year comes unlit; Where we sang the mole now labours, And spiders knit. Yet at midnight if here walking, When the moon sheets wall and tree, I see forms of old time talking, Who smile on me. Thomas Hardy

224

The Impercipient (at a Cathedral Service) THAT from this bright believing band An outcast I should be, That faiths by which my comrades stand Seem fantasies to me, And mirage-mists their Shining Land, Is a drear destiny. Why thus my soul should be consigned To infelicity, Why always I must feel as blind To sights my brethren see, Why joys they've found I cannot find, Abides a mystery.

Since heart of mine knows not that ease Which they know; since it be That He who breathes All's Well to these Breathes no All's Well to me, My lack might move their sympathies And Christian charity! I am like a gazer who should mark An inland company Standing upfingered, with, "Hark! hark! The glorious distant sea!" And feel, "Alas, 'tis but yon dark And wind-swept pine to me!" Yet I would bear my shortcomings With meet tranquillity, But for the charge that blessed things I'd liefer have unbe. O, doth a bird deprived of wings Go earth-bound wilfully! . . . . Enough. As yet disquiet clings About us. Rest shall we.

Thomas Hardy

225

The Inconsistent I say, "She was as good as fair," When standing by her mound; "Such passing sweetness," I declare, "No longer treads the ground." I say, "What living Love can catch Her bloom and bonhomie, And what in newer maidens match Her olden warmth to me!"

- There stands within yon vestry-nook Where bonded lovers sign, Her name upon a faded book With one that is not mine. To him she breathed the tender vow She once had breathed to me, But yet I say, "O love, even now Would I had died for thee!" Thomas Hardy

226

The Ivy-Wife I LONGED to love a full-boughed beech And be as high as he: I stretched an arm within his reach, And signalled unity. But with his drip he forced a breach, And tried to poison me.

I gave the grasp of partnership To one of other race-A plane: he barked him strip by strip From upper bough to base; And me therewith; for gone my grip, My arms could not enlace.

In new affection next I strove To coll an ash I saw, And he in trust received my love; Till with my soft green claw I cramped and bound him as I wove... Such was my love: ha-ha!

Thomas Hardy

By this I gained his strength and height Without his rivalry. But in my triumph I lost sight Of afterhaps. Soon he, Being bark-bound, flagged, snapped, fell outright, And in his fall felled me!

227

The King's Experiment It was a wet wan hour in spring, And Nature met King Doom beside a lane, Wherein Hodge trudged, all blithely ballading The Mother's smiling reign.

"Why warbles he that skies are fair And coombs alight," she cried, "and fallows gay, When I have placed no sunshine in the air Or glow on earth to-day?"

"'Tis in the comedy of things That such should be," returned the one of Doom; "Charge now the scene with brightest blazonings, And he shall call them gloom."

She gave the word: the sun outbroke, All Froomside shone, the hedgebirds raised a song; And later Hodge, upon the midday stroke, Returned the lane along, Low murmuring: "O this bitter scene, And thrice accurst horizon hung with gloom! How deadly like this sky, these fields, these treen, To trappings of the tomb!" The Beldame then: "The fool and blind! Such mad perverseness who may apprehend?" "Nay; there's no madness in it; thou shalt find Thy law there," said her friend. "When Hodge went forth 'twas to his Love, To make her, ere this eve, his wedded prize, And Earth, despite the heaviness above, Was bright as Paradise. "But I sent on my messenger, With cunning arrows poisonous and keen, To take forthwith her laughing life from her, And dull her little een,

"And white her cheek, and still her breath, Ere her too buoyant Hodge had reached her side; So, when he came, he clasped her but in death, And never as his bride. "And there's the humour, as I said; Thy dreary dawn he saw as gleaming gold, And in thy glistening green and radiant red Funereal gloom and cold." Thomas Hardy

228

The Lacking Sense Scene.--A sad-coloured landscape, Waddon Vale I "O Time, whence comes the Mother's moody look amid her labours, As of one who all unwittingly has wounded where she loves? Why weaves she not her world-webs to according lutes and tabors, With nevermore this too remorseful air upon her face, As of angel fallen from grace?" II - "Her look is but her story: construe not its symbols keenly: In her wonderworks yea surely has she wounded where she loves. The sense of ills misdealt for blisses blanks the mien most queenly, Self-smitings kill self-joys; and everywhere beneath the sun Such deeds her hands have done." III - "And how explains thy Ancient Mind her crimes upon her creatures, These fallings from her fair beginnings, woundings where she loves, Into her would-be perfect motions, modes, effects, and features Admitting cramps, black humours, wan decay, and baleful blights, Distress into delights?" IV - "Ah! know'st thou not her secret yet, her vainly veiled deficience, Whence it comes that all unwittingly she wounds the lives she loves? That sightless are those orbs of hers?--which bar to her omniscience Brings those fearful unfulfilments, that red ravage through her zones Whereat all creation groans. V "She whispers it in each pathetic strenuous slow endeavour, When in mothering she unwittingly sets wounds on what she loves; Yet her primal doom pursues her, faultful, fatal is she ever; Though so deft and nigh to vision is her facile finger-touch That the seers marvel much. VI "Deal, then, her groping skill no scorn, no note of malediction; Not long on thee will press the hand that hurts the lives it loves; And while she dares dead-reckoning on, in darkness of affliction, Assist her where thy creaturely dependence can or may, For thou art of her clay."

229

Thomas Hardy

230

The Last Chrysanthemum Why should this flower delay so long To show its tremulous plumes? Now is the time of plaintive robin-song, When flowers are in their tombs.

Through the slow summer, when the sun Called to each frond and whorl That all he could for flowers was being done, Why did it not uncurl?

It must have felt that fervid call Although it took no heed, Waking but now, when leaves like corpses fall, And saps all retrocede. Too late its beauty, lonely thing, The season's shine is spent, Nothing remains for it but shivering In tempests turbulent. Had it a reason for delay, Dreaming in witlessness That for a bloom so delicately gay Winter would stay its stress?

- I talk as if the thing were born With sense to work its mind; Yet it is but one mask of many worn By the Great Face behind. Thomas Hardy

231

The Levelled Churchyard "O passenger, pray list and catch Our sighs and piteous groans, Half stifled in this jumbled patch Of wrenched memorial stones!

"We late-lamented, resting here, Are mixed to human jam, And each to each exclaims in fear, 'I know not which I am!' "The wicked people have annexed The verses on the good; A roaring drunkard sports the text Teetotal Tommy should!

"Where we are huddled none can trace, And if our names remain, They pave some path or p-ing place Where we have never lain! "There's not a modest maiden elf But dreads the final Trumpet, Lest half of her should rise herself, And half some local strumpet!

"From restorations of Thy fane, From smoothings of Thy sward, From zealous Churchmen's pick and plane Deliver us O Lord! Amen!" Thomas Hardy

232

The Lost Pyx: A Mediaeval Legend Some say the spot is banned; that the pillar Cross-and-Hand Attests to a deed of hell; But of else than of bale is the mystic tale That ancient Vale-folk tell. Ere Cernel's Abbey ceased hereabout there dwelt a priest, (In later life sub-prior Of the brotherhood there, whose bones are now bare In the field that was Cernel choir). One night in his cell at the foot of yon dell The priest heard a frequent cry: "Go, father, in haste to the cot on the waste, And shrive a man waiting to die."

Said the priest in a shout to the caller without, "The night howls, the tree-trunks bow; One may barely by day track so rugged a way, And can I then do so now?"

No further word from the dark was heard, And the priest moved never a limb; And he slept and dreamed; till a Visage seemed To frown from Heaven at him.

In a sweat he arose; and the storm shrieked shrill, And smote as in savage joy; While High-Stoy trees twanged to Bubb-Down Hill, And Bubb-Down to High-Stoy. There seemed not a holy thing in hail, Nor shape of light or love, From the Abbey north of Blackmore Vale To the Abbey south thereof.

Yet he plodded thence through the dark immense, And with many a stumbling stride Through copse and briar climbed nigh and nigher To the cot and the sick man's side. When he would have unslung the Vessels uphung To his arm in the steep ascent, He made loud moan: the Pyx was gone Of the Blessed Sacrament. Then in dolorous dread he beat his head: "No earthly prize or pelf Is the thing I've lost in tempest tossed, But the Body of Christ Himself!"

He thought of the Visage his dream revealed, And turned towards whence he came,

233

Hands groping the ground along foot-track and field, And head in a heat of shame. Till here on the hill, betwixt vill and vill, He noted a clear straight ray Stretching down from the sky to a spot hard by, Which shone with the light of day. And gathered around the illumined ground Were common beasts and rare, All kneeling at gaze, and in pause profound Attent on an object there.

'Twas the Pyx, unharmed 'mid the circling rows Of Blackmore's hairy throng, Whereof were oxen, sheep, and does, And hares from the brakes among; And badgers grey, and conies keen, And squirrels of the tree, And many a member seldom seen Of Nature's family.

The ireful winds that scoured and swept Through coppice, clump, and dell, Within that holy circle slept Calm as in hermit's cell. Then the priest bent likewise to the sod And thanked the Lord of Love, And Blessed Mary, Mother of God, And all the saints above.

And turning straight with his priceless freight, He reached the dying one, Whose passing sprite had been stayed for the rite Without which bliss hath none. And when by grace the priest won place, And served the Abbey well, He reared this stone to mark where shone That midnight miracle. Thomas Hardy

234

The Man He Killed Had he and I but met By some old ancient inn, We should have set us down to wet Right many a nipperkin! But ranged as infantry, And staring face to face, I shot at him as he at me, And killed him in his place.

I shot him dead because-Because he was my foe, Just so: my foe of course he was; That's clear enough; although

He thought he'd 'list, perhaps, Off-hand like--just as I-Was out of work--had sold his traps-No other reason why. Yes; quaint and curious war is! You shoot a fellow down You'd treat, if met where any bar is, Or help to half a crown. Thomas Hardy

235

The Masked Face I found me in a great surging space, At either end a door, And I said: "What is this giddying place, With no firm-fixéd floor, That I knew not of before?" "It is Life," said a mask-clad face.

I asked: "But how do I come here, Who never wished to come; Can the light and air be made more clear, The floor more quietsome, And the doors set wide? They numb Fast-locked, and fill with fear." The mask put on a bleak smile then, And said, "O vassal-wight, There once complained a goosequill pen To the scribe of the Infinite Of the words it had to write Because they were past its ken." Thomas Hardy

236

The Milkmaid Under a daisied bank There stands a rich red ruminating cow, And hard against her flank A cotton-hooded milkmaid bends her brow.

The flowery river-ooze Upheaves and falls; the milk purrs in the pail; Few pilgrims but would choose The peace of such a life in such a vale. The maid breathes words--to vent, It seems, her sense of Nature's scenery, Of whose life, sentiment, And essence, very part itself is she.

She bends a glance of pain, And, at a moment, lets escape a tear; Is it that passing train, Whose alien whirr offends her country ear? Nay! Phyllis does not dwell On visual and familiar things like these; What moves her is the spell Of inner themes and inner poetries:

Could but by Sunday morn Her gay new gown come, meads might dry to dun, Trains shriek till ears were torn, If Fred would not prefer that Other One. Thomas Hardy

237

The Mother Mourns When mid-autumn's moan shook the night-time, And sedges were horny, And summer's green wonderwork faltered On leaze and in lane, I fared Yell'ham-Firs way, where dimly Came wheeling around me Those phantoms obscure and insistent That shadows unchain.

Till airs from the needle-thicks brought me A low lamentation, As 'twere of a tree-god disheartened, Perplexed, or in pain. And, heeding, it awed me to gather That Nature herself there Was breathing in aerie accents, With dirgeful refrain,

Weary plaint that Mankind, in these late days, Had grieved her by holding Her ancient high fame of perfection In doubt and disdain . . . - "I had not proposed me a Creature (She soughed) so excelling All else of my kingdom in compass And brightness of brain

"As to read my defects with a god-glance, Uncover each vestige Of old inadvertence, annunciate Each flaw and each stain! "My purpose went not to develop Such insight in Earthland; Such potent appraisements affront me, And sadden my reign!

"Why loosened I olden control here To mechanize skywards, Undeeming great scope could outshape in A globe of such grain?

"Man's mountings of mind-sight I checked not, Till range of his vision Has topped my intent, and found blemish Throughout my domain. "He holds as inept his own soul-shell My deftest achievement -

238

Contemns me for fitful inventions Ill-timed and inane:

"No more sees my sun as a Sanct-shape, My moon as the Night-queen, My stars as august and sublime ones That influences rain: "Reckons gross and ignoble my teaching, Immoral my story, My love-lights a lure, that my species May gather and gain. "'Give me,' he has said, 'but the matter And means the gods lot her, My brain could evolve a creation More seemly, more sane.'

- "If ever a naughtiness seized me To woo adulation From creatures more keen than those crude ones That first formed my train "If inly a moment I murmured, 'The simple praise sweetly, But sweetlier the sage'--and did rashly Man's vision unrein,

"I rue it! . . . His guileless forerunners, Whose brains I could blandish, To measure the deeps of my mysteries Applied them in vain.

"From them my waste aimings and futile I subtly could cover; 'Every best thing,' said they, 'to best purpose Her powers preordain.' -

"No more such! . . . My species are dwindling, My forests grow barren, My popinjays fail from their tappings, My larks from their strain. "My leopardine beauties are rarer, My tusky ones vanish, My children have aped mine own slaughters To quicken my wane.

"Let me grow, then, but mildews and mandrakes, And slimy distortions, Let nevermore things good and lovely To me appertain;

239

"For Reason is rank in my temples, And Vision unruly, And chivalrous laud of my cunning Is heard not again!" Thomas Hardy

240

The Mother Mourns. When mid-autumn's moan shook the night-time, And sedges were horny, And summer's green wonderwork faltered On leaze and in lane, I fared Yell'ham-Firs way, where dimly Came wheeling around me Those phantoms obscure and insistent That shadows unchain.

Till airs from the needle-thicks brought me A low lamentation, As 'twere of a tree-god disheartened, Perplexed, or in pain. And, heeding, it awed me to gather That Nature herself there Was breathing in aerie accents, With dirgeful refrain,

Weary plaint that Mankind, in these late days, Had grieved her by holding Her ancient high fame of perfection In doubt and disdain . . . - "I had not proposed me a Creature (She soughed) so excelling All else of my kingdom in compass And brightness of brain

"As to read my defects with a god-glance, Uncover each vestige Of old inadvertence, annunciate Each flaw and each stain! "My purpose went not to develop Such insight in Earthland; Such potent appraisements affront me, And sadden my reign!

"Why loosened I olden control here To mechanize skywards, Undeeming great scope could outshape in A globe of such grain?

"Man's mountings of mind-sight I checked not, Till range of his vision Has topped my intent, and found blemish Throughout my domain. "He holds as inept his own soul-shell My deftest achievement -

241

Contemns me for fitful inventions Ill-timed and inane:

"No more sees my sun as a Sanct-shape, My moon as the Night-queen, My stars as august and sublime ones That influences rain: "Reckons gross and ignoble my teaching, Immoral my story, My love-lights a lure, that my species May gather and gain. "'Give me,' he has said, 'but the matter And means the gods lot her, My brain could evolve a creation More seemly, more sane.'

- "If ever a naughtiness seized me To woo adulation From creatures more keen than those crude ones That first formed my train "If inly a moment I murmured, 'The simple praise sweetly, But sweetlier the sage'--and did rashly Man's vision unrein,

"I rue it! . . . His guileless forerunners, Whose brains I could blandish, To measure the deeps of my mysteries Applied them in vain.

"From them my waste aimings and futile I subtly could cover; 'Every best thing,' said they, 'to best purpose Her powers preordain.' -

"No more such! . . . My species are dwindling, My forests grow barren, My popinjays fail from their tappings, My larks from their strain. "My leopardine beauties are rarer, My tusky ones vanish, My children have aped mine own slaughters To quicken my wane.

"Let me grow, then, but mildews and mandrakes, And slimy distortions, Let nevermore things good and lovely To me appertain;

242

"For Reason is rank in my temples, And Vision unruly, And chivalrous laud of my cunning Is heard not again!" Thomas Hardy

243

The Oxen Christmas Eve, and twelve of the clock. "Now they are all on their knees," An elder said as we sat in a flock By the embers in hearthside ease.

We pictured the meek mild creatures where They dwelt in their strawy pen, Nor did it occur to one of us there To doubt they were kneeling then. So fair a fancy few would weave In these years! Yet, I feel, If someone said on Christmas Eve, "Come; see the oxen kneel

"In the lonely barton by yonder coomb Our childhood used to know," I should go with him in the gloom, Hoping it might be so. Thomas Hardy

244

The Peasant's Confession Good Father!… ’Twas an eve in middle June, And war was waged anew By great Napoleon, who for years had strewn Men’s bones all Europe through.

Three nights ere this, with columned corps he’d crossed The Sambre at Charleroi, To move on Brussels, where the English host Dallied in Parc and Bois. The yestertide we’d heard the gloomy gun Growl through the long-sunned day From Quatre-Bras and Ligny; till the dun Twilight suppressed the fray;

Albeit therein—as lated tongues bespoke— Brunswick’s high heart was drained, And Prussia’s Line and Landwehr, though unbroke, Stood cornered and constrained. And at next noon-time Grouchy slowly passed With thirty thousand men: We hoped thenceforth no army, small or vast, Would trouble us again. My hut lay deeply in a vale recessed, And never a soul seemed nigh When, reassured at length, we went to rest— My children, wife, and I.

But what was this that broke our humble ease? What noise, above the rain, Above the dripping of the poplar trees That smote along the pane? —A call of mastery, bidding me arise, Compelled me to the door, At which a horseman stood in martial guise— Splashed—sweating from every pore.

Had I seen Grouchy? Yes? Which track took he? Could I lead thither on?— Fulfilment would ensure gold pieces three, Perchance more gifts anon. “I bear the Emperor’s mandate,” then he said, “Charging the Marshal straight To strike between the double host ahead Ere they co-operate, “Engaging Blücher till the Emperor put Lord Wellington to flight,

245

And next the Prussians. This to set afoot Is my emprise to-night.”

I joined him in the mist; but, pausing, sought To estimate his say, Grouchy had made for Wavre; and yet, on thought, I did not lead that way. I mused: “If Grouchy thus instructed be, The clash comes sheer hereon; My farm is stript. While, as for pieces three, Money the French have none.

“Grouchy unwarned, moreo’er, the English win, And mine is left to me— They buy, not borrow.”—Hence did I begin To lead him treacherously. By Joidoigne, near to east, as we ondrew, Dawn pierced the humid air; And eastward faced I with him, though I knew Never marched Grouchy there. Near Ottignies we passed, across the Dyle (Lim’lette left far aside), And thence direct toward Pervez and Noville Through green grain, till he cried:

“I doubt thy conduct, man! no track is here I doubt they gagèd word!” Thereat he scowled on me, and pranced me near, And pricked me with his sword.

“Nay, Captain, hold! We skirt, not trace the course Of Grouchy,” said I then: “As we go, yonder went he, with his force Of thirty thousand men.”

—At length noon nighed, when west, from Saint-John’s-Mound, A hoarse artillery boomed, And from Saint-Lambert’s upland, chapel-crowned, The Prussian squadrons loomed. Then to the wayless wet gray ground he leapt; “My mission fails!” he cried; “Too late for Grouchy now to intercept, For, peasant, you have lied!”

He turned to pistol me. I sprang, and drew The sabre from his flank, And ’twixt his nape and shoulder, ere he knew, I struck, and dead he sank.

246

I hid him deep in nodding rye and oat— His shroud green stalks and loam; His requiem the corn-blade’s husky note— And then I hastened home….

—Two armies writhe in coils of red and blue, And brass and iron clang From Goumont, past the front of Waterloo, To Pap’lotte and Smohain. The Guard Imperial wavered on the height; The Emperor’s face grew glum; “I sent,” he said, “to Grouchy yesternight, And yet he does not come!”

’Twas then, Good Father, that the French espied, Streaking the summer land, The men of Blücher. But the Emperor cried, “Grouchy is now at hand!”

And meanwhile Vand’leur, Vivian, Maitland, Kempt, Met d’Erlon, Friant, Ney; But Grouchy—mis-sent, blamed, yet blame-exempt— Grouchy was far away. Be even, slain or struck, Michel the strong, Bold Travers, Dnop, Delord, Smart Guyot, Reil-le, l’Heriter, Friant. Scattered that champaign o’er.

Fallen likewise wronged Duhesme, and skilled Lobau Did that red sunset see; Colbert, Legros, Blancard!… And of the foe Picton and Ponsonby; With Gordon, Canning, Blackman, Ompteda, L’Estrange, Delancey, Packe, Grose, D’Oyly, Stables, Morice, Howard, Hay, Von Schwerin, Watzdorf, Boek, Smith, Phelips, Fuller, Lind, and Battersby, And hosts of ranksmen round… Memorials linger yet to speak to thee Of those that bit the ground!

The Guards’ last column yielded; dykes of dead Lay between vale and ridge, As, thinned yet closing, faint yet fierce, they sped In packs to Genappe Bridge.
Safe was my stock; my capple cow unslain;

247

Intact each cock and hen; But Grouchy far at Wavre all day had lain, And thirty thousand men.

O Saints, had I but lost my earing corn And saved the cause once prized! O Saints, why such false witness had I borne When late I’d sympathized!… So, now, being old, my children eye askance My slowly dwindling store, And crave my mite; till, worn with tarriance, I care for life no more.

To Almighty God henceforth I stand confessed, And Virgin-Saint Marie; O Michael, John, and Holy Ones in rest, Entreat the Lord for me! Thomas Hardy

248

The Peasent's Confession "Si le maréchal Grouchy avait été rejoint par l'officier que Napoléon lui avait expédié la veille à dix heures du soir, toute question eût disparu. Mais cet officier n'était point parvenu à sa destination, ainsi que le maréchal n'a cessé de l'affirmer toute sa vie, et il faut l'en croire, car autrement il n'aurait eu aucune raison pour hésiter. Cet officier avait-il été pris? avait-il passé à l'ennemi? C'est ce qu'on a toujours ignoré." --Thiers: Histoire de l'Empire. "Waterloo." GOOD Father!... 'Twas an eve in middle June, And war was waged anew By great Napoleon, who for years had strewn Men's bones all Europe through.

Three nights ere this, with columned corps he'd crossed The Sambre at Charleroi, To move on Brussels, where the English host Dallied in Parc and Bois. The yestertide we'd heard the gloomy gun Growl through the long-sunned day From Quatre-Bras and Ligny; till the dun Twilight suppressed the fray;

Albeit therein--as lated tongues bespoke-Brunswick's high heart was drained, And Prussia's Line and Landwehr, though unbroke, Stood cornered and constrained. And at next noon-time Grouchy slowly passed With thirty thousand men: We hoped thenceforth no army, small or vast, Would trouble us again. My hut lay deeply in a vale recessed, And never a soul seemed nigh When, reassured at length, we went to rest-My children, wife, and I.

But what was this that broke our humble ease? What noise, above the rain, Above the dripping of the poplar trees That smote along the pane? --A call of mastery, bidding me arise, Compelled me to the door, At which a horseman stood in martial guise-Splashed--sweating from every pore.

Had I seen Grouchy? Yes? Which track took he? Could I lead thither on?-Fulfilment would ensure gold pieces three,

249

"I bear the Emperor's mandate," then he said, "Charging the Marshal straight To strike between the double host ahead Ere they co-operate, "Engaging Blücher till the Emperor put Lord Wellington to flight, And next the Prussians. This to set afoot Is my emprise to-night."

Perchance more gifts anon.

I joined him in the mist; but, pausing, sought To estimate his say, Grouchy had made for Wavre; and yet, on thought, I did not lead that way. I mused: "If Grouchy thus instructed be, The clash comes sheer hereon; My farm is stript. While, as for pieces three, Money the French have none.

"Grouchy unwarned, moreo'er, the English win, And mine is left to me-They buy, not borrow."--Hence did I begin To lead him treacherously. By Joidoigne, near to east, as we ondrew, Dawn pierced the humid air; And eastward faced I with him, though I knew Never marched Grouchy there. Near Ottignies we passed, across the Dyle (Lim'lette left far aside), And thence direct toward Pervez and Noville Through green grain, till he cried:

"I doubt thy conduct, man! no track is here I doubt they gagèd word!" Thereat he scowled on me, and pranced me near, And pricked me with his sword.

"Nay, Captain, hold! We skirt, not trace the course Of Grouchy," said I then: "As we go, yonder went he, with his force Of thirty thousand men."

--At length noon nighed, when west, from Saint-John's-Mound, A hoarse artillery boomed, And from Saint-Lambert's upland, chapel-crowned, The Prussian squadrons loomed.
www.PoemHunter.com - The World's Poetry Archive 250

Then to the wayless wet gray ground he leapt; "My mission fails!" he cried; "Too late for Grouchy now to intercept, For, peasant, you have lied!"

He turned to pistol me. I sprang, and drew The sabre from his flank, And 'twixt his nape and shoulder, ere he knew, I struck, and dead he sank. I hid him deep in nodding rye and oat-His shroud green stalks and loam; His requiem the corn-blade's husky note-And then I hastened home....

--Two armies writhe in coils of red and blue, And brass and iron clang From Goumont, past the front of Waterloo, To Pap'lotte and Smohain. The Guard Imperial wavered on the height; The Emperor's face grew glum; "I sent," he said, "to Grouchy yesternight, And yet he does not come!"

'Twas then, Good Father, that the French espied, Streaking the summer land, The men of Blücher. But the Emperor cried, "Grouchy is now at hand!"

And meanwhile Vand'leur, Vivian, Maitland, Kempt, Met d'Erlon, Friant, Ney; But Grouchy--mis-sent, blamed, yet blame-exempt-Grouchy was far away. Be even, slain or struck, Michel the strong, Bold Travers, Dnop, Delord, Smart Guyot, Reil-le, l'Heriter, Friant. Scattered that champaign o'er.

Fallen likewise wronged Duhesme, and skilled Lobau Did that red sunset see; Colbert, Legros, Blancard!... And of the foe Picton and Ponsonby; With Gordon, Canning, Blackman, Ompteda, L'Estrange, Delancey, Packe, Grose, D'Oyly, Stables, Morice, Howard, Hay, Von Schwerin, Watzdorf, Boek, Smith, Phelips, Fuller, Lind, and Battersby, And hosts of ranksmen round...

251

Memorials linger yet to speak to thee Of those that bit the ground!

The Guards' last column yielded; dykes of dead Lay between vale and ridge, As, thinned yet closing, faint yet fierce, they sped In packs to Genappe Bridge. Safe was my stock; my capple cow unslain; Intact each cock and hen; But Grouchy far at Wavre all day had lain, And thirty thousand men.

O Saints, had I but lost my earing corn And saved the cause once prized! O Saints, why such false witness had I borne When late I'd sympathized!... So, now, being old, my children eye askance My slowly dwindling store, And crave my mite; till, worn with tarriance, I care for life no more.

Thomas Hardy

To Almighty God henceforth I stand confessed, And Virgin-Saint Marie; O Michael, John, and Holy Ones in rest, Entreat the Lord for me!

252

The Phantom Horsewoman. Queer are the ways of a man I know: He comes and stands In a careworn craze, And looks at the sands And in the seaward haze With moveless hands And face and gaze, Then turns to go... And what does he see when he gazes so? They say he sees as an instant thing More clear than today, A sweet soft scene That once was in play By that briny green; Yes, notes alway Warm, real, and keen, What his back years bringA phantom of his own figuring.

Of this vision of his they might say more: Not only there Does he see this sight, But everywhere In his brain-day, night, As if on the air It were drawn rose brightYea, far from that shore Does he carry this vision of heretofore:

A ghost-girl-rider. And though, toil-tried, He withers daily, Time touches her not, But she still rides gaily In his rapt thought On that shagged and shaly Atlantic spot, And as when first eyed Draws rein and sings to the swing of the tide. Thomas Hardy

253

The Pity Of It I walked in loamy Wessex lanes, afar From rail-track and from highway, and I heard In field and farmstead many an ancient word Of local lineage like "Thu bist," "Er war," "Ich woll," "Er sholl," and by-talk similar, Nigh as they speak who in this month's moon gird At England's very loins, thereunto spurred By gangs whose glory threats and slaughters are. Then seemed a Heart crying: "Whosoever they be At root and bottom of this, who flung this flame Between kin folk kin tongued even as are we, Sinister, ugly, lurid, be their fame; May their familiars grow to shun their name, And their brood perish everlastingly." Thomas Hardy

254

The Problem Shall we conceal the Case, or tell it We who believe the evidence? Here and there the watch-towers knell it With a sullen significance, Heard of the few who hearken intently and carry an eagerly upstrained sense. Hearts that are happiest hold not by it; Better we let, then, the old view reign; Since there is peace in it, why decry it? Since there is comfort, why disdain? Note not the pigment the while that the painting determines humanity's joy and pain! Thomas Hardy

255

The Puzzled Game-Birds They are not those who used to feed us When we were young--they cannot be These shapes that now bereave and bleed us? They are not those who used to feed us, For would they not fair terms concede us? - If hearts can house such treachery They are not those who used to feed us When we were young--they cannot be! Thomas Hardy

256

The Puzzled Game-Birds (Triolet) They are not those who used to feed us When we were young--they cannot be These shapes that now bereave and bleed us? They are not those who used to feed us, For would they not fair terms concede us? - If hearts can house such treachery They are not those who used to feed us When we were young--they cannot be! Thomas Hardy

257

The Rambler I do not see the hills around, Nor mark the tints the copses wear; I do not note the grassy ground And constellated daisies there.

I hear not the contralto note Of cuckoos hid on either hand, The whirr that shakes the nighthawk's throat When eve's brown awning hoods the land. Some say each songster, tree and mead-All eloquent of love divine-Receives their constant careful heed: Such keen appraisement is not mine.

The tones around me that I hear, The aspects, meanings, shapes I see, Are those far back ones missed when near, And now perceived too late by me! Thomas Hardy

258

The Respectable Burgher on "The Higher Criticism" Since Reverend Doctors now declare That clerks and people must prepare To doubt if Adam ever were; To hold the flood a local scare; To argue, though the stolid stare, That everything had happened ere The prophets to its happening sware; That David was no giant-slayer, Nor one to call a God-obeyer In certain details we could spare, But rather was a debonair Shrewd bandit, skilled as banjo-player: That Solomon sang the fleshly Fair, And gave the Church no thought whate'er; That Esther with her royal wear, And Mordecai, the son of Jair, And Joshua's triumphs, Job's despair, And Balaam's ass's bitter blare; Nebuchadnezzar's furnace-flare, And Daniel and the den affair, And other stories rich and rare, Were writ to make old doctrine wear Something of a romantic air: That the Nain widow's only heir, And Lazarus with cadaverous glare (As done in oils by Piombo's care) Did not return from Sheol's lair: That Jael set a fiendish snare, That Pontius Pilate acted square, That never a sword cut Malchus' ear And (but for shame I must forbear) That -- -- did not reappear! . . . - Since thus they hint, nor turn a hair, All churchgoing will I forswear, And sit on Sundays in my chair, And read that moderate man Voltaire. Thomas Hardy

259

The Roman Road The Roman Road runs straight and bare As the pale parting-line in hair Across the heath. And thoughtful men Contrast its days of Now and Then, And delve, and measure, and compare;

Visioning on the vacant air Helmeted legionnaires, who proudly rear The Eagle, as they pace again The Roman Road. But no tall brass-helmeted legionnaire Haunts it for me. Uprises there A mother's form upon my ken, Guiding my infant steps, as when We walked that ancient thoroughfare, The Roman Road. Thomas Hardy

260

The Ruined Maid "O 'Melia, my dear, this does everything crown! Who could have supposed I should meet you in Town? And whence such fair garments, such prosperi-ty?""O didn't you know I'd been ruined?" said she.

-"You left us in tatters, without shoes or socks, Tired of digging potatoes, and spudding up docks; And now you've gay bracelets and bright feathers three!""Yes: that's how we dress when we're ruined," said she. -"At home in the barton you said 'thee' and 'thou,' And 'thik oon' and 'theäs oon' and 't'other'; but now Your talking quite fits 'ee for high compan-ny!""Some polish is gained with one's ruin," said she.

-"Your hands were like paws then, you face blue and bleak But now I'm bewitched by your delicate cheek, And your little gloves fit as on any la-dy!""We never do work when we're ruined," said she. -"You used to call home-life a hag-ridden dream, And you'd sigh, and you'd sock; but at present you seem To know not of megrims or melancho-ly!""True. One's pretty lively when ruined," said she. -"I wish I had feathers, a fine sweeping gown, And a delicate face, and could strut about Town""My dear - raw country girl, such as you be, Thomas Hardy

Cannot quite expect that. You ain't ruined," said she.

261

The Seasons of Her Year I Winter is white on turf and tree, And birds are fled; But summer songsters pipe to me, And petals spread, For what I dreamt of secretly His lips have said! II O 'tis a fine May morn, they say, And blooms have blown; But wild and wintry is my day, My birds make moan; For he who vowed leaves me to pay Alone--alone! Thomas Hardy

262

The Selfsame Song A bird sings the selfsame song, With never a fault in its flow, That we listened to here those long Long years ago. A pleasing marvel is how A strain of such rapturous rote Should have gone on thus till now unchanged in a note! --But its not the selfsame bird.-No: perished to dust is he.... As also are those who heard That song with me. Thomas Hardy

263

The Self-Unseeing Here is the ancient floor, Footworn and hollowed and thin, Here was the former door Where the dead feet walked in. She sat here in her chair, Smiling into the fire; He who played stood there, Bowing it higher and higher.

Childlike, I danced in a dream; Blessings emblazoned that day; Everything glowed with a gleam; Yet we were looking away! Thomas Hardy

264

The Sergeant's Song WHEN Lawyers strive to heal a breach, And Parsons practise what they preach; Then Little Boney he'll pounce down, And march his men on London town! Rollicum-rorum, tol-lol-lorum, Rollicum-rorum, tol-lol-lay! When Justices hold equal scales, And Rogues are only found in jails; Then Little Boney he'll pounce down, And march his men on London town! Rollicum-rorum, etc.

When Rich Men find their wealth a curse, And fill therewith the Poor Man's purse; Then Little Boney he'll pounce down, And march his men on London town! Rollicum-rorum, etc. When Husbands with their Wives agree, And Maids won't wed from modesty; Then Little Boney he'll pounce down, And march his men on London town! Rollicum-rorum, tol-lol-lorum, Rollicum-rorum, tol-lol-lay!

Thomas Hardy

265

The Sick God I In days when men had joy of war, A God of Battles sped each mortal jar; The peoples pledged him heart and hand, From Israel's land to isles afar. II His crimson form, with clang and chime, Flashed on each murk and murderous meeting-time, And kings invoked, for rape and raid, His fearsome aid in rune and rhyme. III On bruise and blood-hole, scar and seam, On blade and bolt, he flung his fulgid beam: His haloes rayed the very gore, And corpses wore his glory-gleam. IV Often an early King or Queen, And storied hero onward, knew his sheen; 'Twas glimpsed by Wolfe, by Ney anon, And Nelson on his blue demesne. V But new light spread. That god's gold nimb And blazon have waned dimmer and more dim; Even his flushed form begins to fade, Till but a shade is left of him. VI That modern meditation broke His spell, that penmen's pleadings dealt a stroke, Say some; and some that crimes too dire Did much to mire his crimson cloak. VII Yea, seeds of crescive sympathy Were sown by those more excellent than he, Long known, though long contemned till then The gods of men in amity. VIII Souls have grown seers, and thought out-brings

266

The mournful many-sidedness of things With foes as friends, enfeebling ires And fury-fires by gaingivings! IX He scarce impassions champions now; They do and dare, but tensely--pale of brow; And would they fain uplift the arm Of that faint form they know not how. X Yet wars arise, though zest grows cold; Wherefore, at whiles, as 'twere in ancient mould He looms, bepatched with paint and lath; But never hath he seemed the old! XI Let men rejoice, let men deplore. The lurid Deity of heretofore Succumbs to one of saner nod; The Battle-god is god no more. Thomas Hardy

267

The Sick God. I In days when men had joy of war, A God of Battles sped each mortal jar; The peoples pledged him heart and hand, From Israel's land to isles afar. II His crimson form, with clang and chime, Flashed on each murk and murderous meeting-time, And kings invoked, for rape and raid, His fearsome aid in rune and rhyme. III On bruise and blood-hole, scar and seam, On blade and bolt, he flung his fulgid beam: His haloes rayed the very gore, And corpses wore his glory-gleam. IV Often an early King or Queen, And storied hero onward, knew his sheen; 'Twas glimpsed by Wolfe, by Ney anon, And Nelson on his blue demesne. V But new light spread. That god's gold nimb And blazon have waned dimmer and more dim; Even his flushed form begins to fade, Till but a shade is left of him. VI That modern meditation broke His spell, that penmen's pleadings dealt a stroke, Say some; and some that crimes too dire Did much to mire his crimson cloak. VII Yea, seeds of crescive sympathy Were sown by those more excellent than he, Long known, though long contemned till then The gods of men in amity. VIII Souls have grown seers, and thought out-brings

268

The mournful many-sidedness of things With foes as friends, enfeebling ires And fury-fires by gaingivings! IX He scarce impassions champions now; They do and dare, but tensely--pale of brow; And would they fain uplift the arm Of that faint form they know not how. X Yet wars arise, though zest grows cold; Wherefore, at whiles, as 'twere in ancient mould He looms, bepatched with paint and lath; But never hath he seemed the old! XI Let men rejoice, let men deplore. The lurid Deity of heretofore Succumbs to one of saner nod; The Battle-god is god no more. Thomas Hardy

269

The Sleep-Worker When wilt thou wake, O Mother, wake and see As one who, held in trance, has laboured long By vacant rote and prepossession strong The coils that thou hast wrought unwittingly;

Wherein have place, unrealized by thee, Fair growths, foul cankers, right enmeshed with wrong, Strange orchestras of victim-shriek and song, And curious blends of ache and ecstasy? Should that morn come, and show thy opened eyes All that Life's palpitating tissues feel, How wilt thou bear thyself in thy surprise? Wilt thou destroy, in one wild shock of shame, Thy whole high heaving firmamental frame, Or patiently adjust, amend, and heal? Thomas Hardy

270

The Slow Nature (an Incident of Froom Valley) "THY husband--poor, poor Heart!--is dead-Dead, out by Moreford Rise; A bull escaped the barton-shed, Gored him, and there he lies!" --"Ha, ha--go away! 'Tis a tale, methink, Thou joker Kit!" laughed she. "I've known thee many a year, Kit Twink, And ever hast thou fooled me!" --"But, Mistress Damon--I can swear Thy goodman John is dead! And soon th'lt hear their feet who bear His body to his bed."

So unwontedly sad was the merry man's face-That face which had long deceived-That she gazed and gazed; and then could trace The truth there; and she believed.

She laid a hand on the dresser-ledge, And scanned far Egdon-side; And stood; and you heard the wind-swept sedge And the rippling Froom; till she cried: "O my chamber's untidied, unmade my bed, Though the day has begun to wear! 'What a slovenly hussif!' it will be said, When they all go up my stair!"

She disappeared; and the joker stood Depressed by his neighbor's doom, And amazed that a wife struck to widowhood Thought first of her unkempt room.

Thomas Hardy

But a fortnight thence she could take no food, And she pined in a slow decay; While Kit soon lost his mournful mood And laughed in his ancient way.

271

The Souls of the Slain I The thick lids of Night closed upon me Alone at the Bill Of the Isle by the Race {1} Many-caverned, bald, wrinkled of face And with darkness and silence the spirit was on me To brood and be still. II No wind fanned the flats of the ocean, Or promontory sides, Or the ooze by the strand, Or the bent-bearded slope of the land, Whose base took its rest amid everlong motion Of criss-crossing tides. III Soon from out of the Southward seemed nearing A whirr, as of wings Waved by mighty-vanned flies, Or by night-moths of measureless size, And in softness and smoothness well-nigh beyond hearing Of corporal things. IV And they bore to the bluff, and alighted A dim-discerned train Of sprites without mould, Frameless souls none might touch or might hold On the ledge by the turreted lantern, farsighted By men of the main. V And I heard them say "Home!" and I knew them For souls of the felled On the earth's nether bord Under Capricorn, whither they'd warred, And I neared in my awe, and gave heedfulness to them With breathings inheld. VI Then, it seemed, there approached from the northward A senior soul-flame Of the like filmy hue: And he met them and spake: "Is it you, O my men?" Said they, "Aye! We bear homeward and hearthward

272

VII

To list to our fame!"

"I've flown there before you," he said then: "Your households are well; But--your kin linger less On your glory arid war-mightiness Than on dearer things."--"Dearer?" cried these from the dead then, "Of what do they tell?" VIII "Some mothers muse sadly, and murmur Your doings as boys Recall the quaint ways Of your babyhood's innocent days. Some pray that, ere dying, your faith had grown firmer, And higher your joys. IX "A father broods: 'Would I had set him To some humble trade, And so slacked his high fire, And his passionate martial desire; Had told him no stories to woo him and whet him To this due crusade!" X "And, General, how hold out our sweethearts, Sworn loyal as doves?" --"Many mourn; many think It is not unattractive to prink Them in sables for heroes. Some fickle and fleet hearts Have found them new loves." XI "And our wives?" quoth another resignedly, "Dwell they on our deeds?" --"Deeds of home; that live yet Fresh as new--deeds of fondness or fret; Ancient words that were kindly expressed or unkindly, These, these have their heeds." XII --"Alas! then it seems that our glory Weighs less in their thought Than our old homely acts,

273

And the long-ago commonplace facts Of our lives--held by us as scarce part of our story, And rated as nought!" XIII Then bitterly some: "Was it wise now To raise the tomb-door For such knowledge? Away!" But the rest: "Fame we prized till to-day; Yet that hearts keep us green for old kindness we prize now A thousand times more!" XIV Thus speaking, the trooped apparitions Began to disband And resolve them in two: Those whose record was lovely and true Bore to northward for home: those of bitter traditions Again left the land, XV And, towering to seaward in legions, They paused at a spot Overbending the Race That engulphing, ghast, sinister place Whither headlong they plunged, to the fathomless regions Of myriads forgot. XVI And the spirits of those who were homing Passed on, rushingly, Like the Pentecost Wind; And the whirr of their wayfaring thinned And surceased on the sky, and but left in the gloaming Sea-mutterings and me. Thomas Hardy

274

The Souls of the Slain. I The thick lids of Night closed upon me Alone at the Bill Of the Isle by the Race Many-caverned, bald, wrinkled of face And with darkness and silence the spirit was on me To brood and be still. II No wind fanned the flats of the ocean, Or promontory sides, Or the ooze by the strand, Or the bent-bearded slope of the land, Whose base took its rest amid everlong motion Of criss-crossing tides. III Soon from out of the Southward seemed nearing A whirr, as of wings Waved by mighty-vanned flies, Or by night-moths of measureless size, And in softness and smoothness well-nigh beyond hearing Of corporal things. IV And they bore to the bluff, and alighted A dim-discerned train Of sprites without mould, Frameless souls none might touch or might hold On the ledge by the turreted lantern, farsighted By men of the main. V And I heard them say "Home!" and I knew them For souls of the felled On the earth's nether bord Under Capricorn, whither they'd warred, And I neared in my awe, and gave heedfulness to them With breathings inheld. VI Then, it seemed, there approached from the northward A senior soul-flame Of the like filmy hue: And he met them and spake: "Is it you, O my men?" Said they, "Aye! We bear homeward and hearthward

275

VII

To list to our fame!"

"I've flown there before you," he said then: "Your households are well; But--your kin linger less On your glory arid war-mightiness Than on dearer things."--"Dearer?" cried these from the dead then, "Of what do they tell?" VIII "Some mothers muse sadly, and murmur Your doings as boys Recall the quaint ways Of your babyhood's innocent days. Some pray that, ere dying, your faith had grown firmer, And higher your joys. IX "A father broods: 'Would I had set him To some humble trade, And so slacked his high fire, And his passionate martial desire; Had told him no stories to woo him and whet him To this due crusade!" X "And, General, how hold out our sweethearts, Sworn loyal as doves?" --"Many mourn; many think It is not unattractive to prink Them in sables for heroes. Some fickle and fleet hearts Have found them new loves." XI "And our wives?" quoth another resignedly, "Dwell they on our deeds?" --"Deeds of home; that live yet Fresh as new--deeds of fondness or fret; Ancient words that were kindly expressed or unkindly, These, these have their heeds." XII --"Alas! then it seems that our glory Weighs less in their thought Than our old homely acts,

276

And the long-ago commonplace facts Of our lives--held by us as scarce part of our story, And rated as nought!" XIII Then bitterly some: "Was it wise now To raise the tomb-door For such knowledge? Away!" But the rest: "Fame we prized till to-day; Yet that hearts keep us green for old kindness we prize now A thousand times more!" XIV Thus speaking, the trooped apparitions Began to disband And resolve them in two: Those whose record was lovely and true Bore to northward for home: those of bitter traditions Again left the land, XV And, towering to seaward in legions, They paused at a spot Overbending the Race That engulphing, ghast, sinister place Whither headlong they plunged, to the fathomless regions Of myriads forgot. XVI And the spirits of those who were homing Passed on, rushingly, Like the Pentecost Wind; And the whirr of their wayfaring thinned And surceased on the sky, and but left in the gloaming Sea-mutterings and me. Thomas Hardy

277

The Stranger's Song (As sung by Mr. Charles Charrington in the play of "The Three Wayfarers") O MY trade it is the rarest one, Simple shepherds all-My trade is a sight to see; For my customers I tie, and take 'em up on high, And waft 'em to a far countree!

My tools are but common ones, Simple shepherds all-My tools are no sight to see: A little hempen string, and a post whereon to swing, Are implements enough for me!

Thomas Hardy

To-morrow is my working day, Simple shepherds all-To-morrow is a working day for me: For the farmer's sheep is slain, and the lad who did it ta'en, And on his soul may God ha' mer-cy!

278

The Subalterns I "Poor wanderer," said the leaden sky, "I fain would lighten thee, But there are laws in force on high Which say it must not be." II --"I would not freeze thee, shorn one," cried The North, "knew I but how To warm my breath, to slack my stride; But I am ruled as thou." III --"To-morrow I attack thee, wight," Said Sickness. "Yet I swear I bear thy little ark no spite, But am bid enter there." IV --"Come hither, Son," I heard Death say; "I did not will a grave Should end thy pilgrimage to-day, But I, too, am a slave!" V We smiled upon each other then, And life to me had less Of that fell look it wore ere when They owned their passiveness. Thomas Hardy

279

The Sun on the Bookcase Once more the cauldron of the sun Smears the bookcase with winy red, And here my page is, and there my bed, And the apple-tree shadows travel along. Soon their intangible track will be run, And dusk grow strong And they have fled. Yes: now the boiling ball is gone, And I have wasted another day.... But wasted--wasted, do I say? Is it a waste to have imagined one Beyond the hills there, who, anon, My great deeds done, Will be mine alway? Thomas Hardy

280

The Superseded I As newer comers crowd the fore, We drop behind. - We who have laboured long and sore Times out of mind, And keen are yet, must not regret To drop behind. II Yet there are of us some who grieve To go behind; Staunch, strenuous souls who scarce believe Their fires declined, And know none cares, remembers, spares Who go behind. III 'Tis not that we have unforetold The drop behind; We feel the new must oust the old In every kind; But yet we think, must we, must WE, Too, drop behind? Thomas Hardy

281

The Supplanter: A Tale I He bends his travel-tarnished feet To where she wastes in clay: From day-dawn until eve he fares Along the wintry way; From day-dawn until eve repairs Unto her mound to pray. II "Are these the gravestone shapes that meet My forward-straining view? Or forms that cross a window-blind In circle, knot, and queue: Gay forms, that cross and whirl and wind To music throbbing through?" III "The Keeper of the Field of Tombs Dwells by its gateway-pier; He celebrates with feast and dance His daughter's twentieth year: He celebrates with wine of France The birthday of his dear." IV "The gates are shut when evening glooms: Lay down your wreath, sad wight; To-morrow is a time more fit For placing flowers aright: The morning is the time for it; Come, wake with us to-night!" V He grounds his wreath, and enters in, And sits, and shares their cheer. "I fain would foot with you, young man, Before all others here; I fain would foot it for a span With such a cavalier!" VI She coaxes, clasps, nor fails to win His first-unwilling hand: The merry music strikes its staves, The dancers quickly band; And with the damsel of the graves

282

VII

He duly takes his stand.

"You dance divinely, stranger swain, Such grace I've never known. O longer stay! Breathe not adieu And leave me here alone! O longer stay: to her be true Whose heart is all your own!" VIII "I mark a phantom through the pane, That beckons in despair, Its mouth all drawn with heavy moan Her to whom once I sware!" "Nay; 'tis the lately carven stone Of some strange girl laid there!" IX "I see white flowers upon the floor Betrodden to a clot; My wreath were they?"--"Nay; love me much, Swear you'll forget me not! 'Twas but a wreath! Full many such Are brought here and forgot." *** X

The watches of the night grow hoar, He rises ere the sun; "Now could I kill thee here!" he says, "For winning me from one Who ever in her living days Was pure as cloistered nun!" XI She cowers, and he takes his track Afar for many a mile, For evermore to be apart From her who could beguile His senses by her burning heart, And win his love awhile. XII A year: and he is travelling back

283

To her who wastes in clay; From day-dawn until eve he fares Along the wintry way, From day-dawn until eve repairs Unto her mound to pray. XIII And there he sets him to fulfil His frustrate first intent: And lay upon her bed, at last, The offering earlier meant: When, on his stooping figure, ghast And haggard eyes are bent. XIV "O surely for a little while You can be kind to me! For do you love her, do you hate, She knows not--cares not she: Only the living feel the weight Of loveless misery! XV "I own my sin; I've paid its cost, Being outcast, shamed, and bare: I give you daily my whole heart, Your babe my tender care, I pour you prayers; and aye to part Is more than I can bear!" XVI He turns--unpitying, passion-tossed; "I know you not!" he cries, "Nor know your child. I knew this maid, But she's in Paradise!" And swiftly in the winter shade He breaks from her and flies. Thomas Hardy

284

The Temporary The All CHANGE and chancefulness in my flowering youthtime, Set me sun by sun near to one unchosen; Wrought us fellowly, and despite divergence, Friends interblent us. "Cherish him can I while the true one forthcome-Come the rich fulfiller of my prevision; Life is roomy yet, and the odds unbounded." So self-communed I. Thwart my wistful way did a damsel saunter, Fair not fairest, good not best of her feather; "Maiden meet," held I, "till arise my forefelt Wonder of women."

Long a visioned hermitage deep desiring, Tenements uncouth I was fain to house in; "Let such lodging be for a breath-while," thought I, "Soon a more seemly.

"Then, high handiwork will I make my life-deed, Truth and Light outshow; but the ripe time pending, Intermissive aim at the thing sufficeth." Thus I ... But lo, me!

Thomas Hardy

Mistress, friend, place, aims to be bettered straightway, Bettered not has Fate or my hand's achieving; Sole the showance those of my onward earth-track-Never transcended!

285

The Tenant-For-Life The sun said, watching my watering-pot "Some morn you'll pass away; These flowers and plants I parch up hot Who'll water them that day?

"Those banks and beds whose shape your eye Has planned in line so true, New hands will change, unreasoning why Such shape seemed best to you. "Within your house will strangers sit, And wonder how first it came; They'll talk of their schemes for improving it, And will not mention your name. "They'll care not how, or when, or at what You sighed, laughed, suffered here, Though you feel more in an hour of the spot Than they will feel in a year "As I look on at you here, now, Shall I look on at these; But as to our old times, avow No knowledge--hold my peace! . . . "O friend, it matters not, I say; Bethink ye, I have shined On nobler ones than you, and they Are dead men out of mind!" Thomas Hardy

286

The To-Be-Forgotten I I heard a small sad sound, And stood awhile among the tombs around: "Wherefore, old friends," said I, "are you distrest, Now, screened from life's unrest?" II --"O not at being here; But that our future second death is near; When, with the living, memory of us numbs, And blank oblivion comes!

III "These, our sped ancestry, Lie here embraced by deeper death than we; Nor shape nor thought of theirs can you descry With keenest backward eye. IV "They count as quite forgot; They are as men who have existed not; Theirs is a loss past loss of fitful breath; It is the second death.

V "We here, as yet, each day Are blest with dear recall; as yet, can say We hold in some soul loved continuance Of shape and voice and glance.

VI "But what has been will be -First memory, then oblivion's swallowing sea; Like men foregone, shall we merge into those Whose story no one knows.

VII "For which of us could hope To show in life that world-awakening scope Granted the few whose memory none lets die, But all men magnify?

VIII "We were but Fortune's sport; Things true, things lovely, things of good report We neither shunned nor sought ... We see our bourne, And seeing it we mourn." Thomas Hardy

287

The Tree: An Old Man's Story I Its roots are bristling in the air Like some mad Earth-god's spiny hair; The loud south-wester's swell and yell Smote it at midnight, and it fell. Thus ends the tree Where Some One sat with me. II Its boughs, which none but darers trod, A child may step on from the sod, And twigs that earliest met the dawn Are lit the last upon the lawn. Cart off the tree Beneath whose trunk sat we! III Yes, there we sat: she cooed content, And bats ringed round, and daylight went; The gnarl, our seat, is wrenched and sunk, Prone that queer pocket in the trunk Where lay the key To her pale mystery. IV "Years back, within this pocket-hole I found, my Love, a hurried scrawl Meant not for me," at length said I; "I glanced thereat, and let it lie: The words were three 'Beloved, I agree.' V "Who placed it here; to what request It gave assent, I never guessed. Some prayer of some hot heart, no doubt, To some coy maiden hereabout, Just as, maybe, With you, Sweet Heart, and me." VI She waited, till with quickened breath She spoke, as one who banisheth Reserves that lovecraft heeds so well, To ease some mighty wish to tell: "'Twas I," said she,

288

VII

"Who wrote thus clinchingly.

"My lover's wife--aye, wife!--knew nought Of what we felt, and bore, and thought . . . He'd said: 'I wed with thee or die: She stands between, 'tis true. But why? Do thou agree, And--she shalt cease to be.' VIII "How I held back, how love supreme Involved me madly in his scheme Why should I say? . . . I wrote assent (You found it hid) to his intent . . . She--DIED . . . But he Came not to wed with me. IX "O shrink not, Love!--Had these eyes seen But once thine own, such had not been! But we were strangers . . . Thus the plot Cleared passion's path.--Why came he not To wed with me? . . . He wived the gibbet-tree." X - Under that oak of heretofore Sat Sweetheart mine with me no more: By many a Fiord, and Strom, and Fleuve Have I since wandered . . . Soon, for love, Distraught went she 'Twas said for love of me. Thomas Hardy

289

The Two Men THERE were two youths of equal age, Wit, station, strength, and parentage; They studied at the self-same schools, And shaped their thoughts by common rules. One pondered on the life of man, His hopes, his endings, and began To rate the Market's sordid war As something scarce worth living for. "I'll brace to higher aims," said he, "I'll further Truth and Purity; Thereby to mend and mortal lot And sweeten sorrow. Thrive I not,

"Winning their hearts, my kind will give Enough that I may lowly live, And house my Love in some dim dell, For pleasing them and theirs so well."

Idly attired, with features wan, In secret swift he labored on; Such press of power had brought much gold Applied to things of meaner mould. Sometimes he wished his aims had been To gather gains like other men; Then thanked his God he'd traced his track Too far for wish to drag him back. He lookèd from his loft one day To where his slighted garden lay; Nettles and hemlock hid each lawn, And every flower was starved and gone. He fainted in his heart, whereon He rose, and sought his plighted one, Resolved to loose her bond withal, Lest she should perish in his fall.

He met her with a careless air, As though he'd ceased to find her fair, And said: "True love is dust to me; I cannot kiss: I tire of thee!"

(That she might scorn him was he fain, To put her sooner out of pain; For incensed love breathes quick and dies, When famished love a-lingering lies.) Once done, his soul was so betossed, It found no more the force it lost:

290

Hope was his only drink and food, And hope extinct, decay ensued.

And, living long so closely penned, He had not kept a single friend; He dwindled thin as phantoms be, And drooped to death in poverty....

Meantime his schoolmate had gone out To join the fortune-finding rout; He liked the winnings of the mart, But wearied of the working part. He turned to seek a privy lair, Neglecting note of garb and hair, And day by day reclined and thought How he might live by doing nought.

"I plan a valued scheme," he said To some. "But lend me of your bread, And when the vast result looms nigh, In profit you shall stand as I."

Yet they took counsel to restrain Their kindness till they saw the gain; And, since his substance now had run, He rose to do what might be done. He went unto his Love by night, And said: "My Love, I faint in fight: Deserving as thou dost a crown, My cares shall never drag thee down."

(He had descried a maid whose line Would hand her on much corn and wine, And held her far in worth above One who could only pray and love.)

But this Fair read him; whence he failed To do the deed so blithely hailed; He saw his projects wholly marred, And gloom and want oppressed him hard; Till, living to so mean an end, Whereby he'd lost his every friend, He perished in a pauper sty, His mate the dying pauper nigh.

And moralists, reflecting, said, As "dust to dust" in burial read Was echoed from each coffin-lid, "These men were like in all they did."

291

Thomas Hardy

292

The Voice Woman much missed, how you call to me, call to me, Saying that now you are not as you were When you had changed from the one who was all to me, But as at first, when our day was fair. Can it be you that I hear? Let me view you, then, Standing as when I drew near to the town Where you would wait for me: yes, as I knew you then, Even to the original air-blue gown! Or is it only the breeze, in its listlessness Travelling across the wet mead to me here, You being ever dissolved to wan wistlessness, Heard no more again far or near?

Thus I; faltering forward, Leaves around me falling, Wind oozing thin through the thorn from norward, And the woman calling. Thomas Hardy

293

The Well-Beloved I wayed by star and planet shine Towards the dear one's home At Kingsbere, there to make her mine When the next sun upclomb. I edged the ancient hill and wood Beside the Ikling Way, Nigh where the Pagan temple stood In the world's earlier day. And as I quick and quicker walked On gravel and on green, I sang to sky, and tree, or talked Of her I called my queen. - "O faultless is her dainty form, And luminous her mind; She is the God-created norm Of perfect womankind!"

A shape whereon one star-blink gleamed Glode softly by my side, A woman's; and her motion seemed The motion of my bride.

And yet methought she'd drawn erstwhile Adown the ancient leaze, Where once were pile and peristyle For men's idolatries. - "O maiden lithe and lone, what may Thy name and lineage be, Who so resemblest by this ray My darling?--Art thou she?"

The Shape: "Thy bride remains within Her father's grange and grove." - "Thou speakest rightly," I broke in, "Thou art not she I love."

- "Nay: though thy bride remains inside Her father's walls," said she, "The one most dear is with thee here, For thou dost love but me." Then I: "But she, my only choice, Is now at Kingsbere Grove?" Again her soft mysterious voice: "I am thy only Love."

Thus still she vouched, and still I said, "O sprite, that cannot be!" . . .

294

It was as if my bosom bled, So much she troubled me.

The sprite resumed: "Thou hast transferred To her dull form awhile My beauty, fame, and deed, and word, My gestures and my smile. "O fatuous man, this truth infer, Brides are not what they seem; Thou lovest what thou dreamest her; I am thy very dream!" - "O then," I answered miserably, Speaking as scarce I knew, "My loved one, I must wed with thee If what thou say'st be true!" She, proudly, thinning in the gloom: "Though, since troth-plight began, I've ever stood as bride to groom, I wed no mortal man!"

Thereat she vanished by the Cross That, entering Kingsbere town, The two long lanes form, near the fosse Below the faneless Down. - When I arrived and met my bride, Her look was pinched and thin, As if her soul had shrunk and died, And left a waste within. Thomas Hardy

295

The Widow By Mellstock Lodge and Avenue Towards her door I went, And sunset on her window-panes Reflected our intent. The creeper on the gable nigh Was fired to more than red And when I came to halt thereby "Bright as my joy!" I said.

Of late days it had been her aim To meet me in the hall; Now at my footsteps no one came; And no one to my call.

Again I knocked; and tardily An inner step was heard, And I was shown her presence then With scarce an answering word. She met me, and but barely took My proffered warm embrace; Preoccupation weighed her look, And hardened her sweet face.

"To-morrow--could you--would you call? Make brief your present stay? My child is ill--my one, my all! And can't be left to-day."

And then she turns, and gives commands As I were out of sound, Or were no more to her and hers Than any neighbour round . . . - As maid I wooed her; but one came And coaxed her heart away, And when in time he wedded her I deemed her gone for aye. He won, I lost her; and my loss I bore I know not how; But I do think I suffered then Less wretchedness than now.

For Time, in taking him, had oped An unexpected door Of bliss for me, which grew to seem Far surer than before . . . Her word is steadfast, and I know That plighted firm are we:

296

But she has caught new love-calls since She smiled as maid on me! Thomas Hardy

297

The Year's Awakening How do you know that the pilgrim track Along the belting zodiac Swept by the sun in his seeming rounds Is traced by now to the Fishes' bounds And into the Ram, when weeks of cloud Have wrapt the sky in a clammy shroud, And never as yet a tinct of spring Has shown in the Earth's apparelling; O vespering bird, how do you know, How do you know?

How do you know, deep underground, Hid in your bed from sight and sound, Without a turn in temperature, With weather life can scarce endure, That light has won a fraction's strength, And day put on some moments' length, Whereof in merest rote will come, Weeks hence, mild airs that do not numb; O crocus root, how do you know, How do you know? Thomas Hardy

298

Then and Now When battles were fought With a chivalrous sense of should and ought, In spirit men said, "End we quick or dead, Honour is some reward! Let us fight fair -- for our own best or worst; So, Gentlemen of the Guard, Fire first!" In the open they stood, Man to man in his knightlihood: They would not deign To profit by a stain On the honourable rules, Knowing that practise perfidy no man durst Who in the heroic schools Was nurst.

But now, behold, what Is war with those where honour is not! Rama laments Its dead innocents; Herod howls: "Sly slaughter Rules now! Let us, by modes once called accurst, Overhead, under water, Stab first." Thomas Hardy

299

Thought Of Ph---a At News Of Her Death NOT a line of her writing have I, Not a thread of her hair, No mark of her late time as dame in her dwelling, whereby I may picture her there; And in vain do I urge my unsight To conceive my lost prize At her close, whom I knew when her dreams were upbrimming with light, And with laughter her eyes. What scenes spread around her last days, Sad, shining, or dim? Did her gifts and compassions enray and enarch her sweet ways With an aureate nimb? Or did life-light decline from her years, And mischances control Her full day-star; unease, or regret, or forebodings, or fears Disennoble her soul? Thus I do but the phantom retain Of the maiden of yore As my relic; yet haply the best of her--fined in my brain It may be the more That no line of her writing have I, Nor a thread of her hair, No mark of her late time as dame in her dwelling, whereby I may picture her there.

Thomas Hardy

300

Thoughts of Phena at news of her death Not a line of her writing have I Not a thread of her hair, No mark of her late time as dame in her dwelling, whereby I may picture her there; And in vain do I urge my unsight To conceive my lost prize At her close, whom I knew when her dreams were upbrimming with light And with laughter her eyes. What scenes spread around her last days, Sad, shining, or dim? Did her gifts and compassions enray and enarch her sweet ways With an aureate nimb? Or did life-light decline from her years, And mischances control Her full day-star; unease, or regret, or forebodings, or fears Disennoble her soul? Thus I do but the phantom retain Of the maiden of yore As my relic; yet haply the best of her--fined in my brain It may be the more That no line of her writing have I, Nor a thread of her hair, No mark of her late time as dame in her dwelling, whereby I may picture her there. March 1890. Thomas Hardy

301

To A Lady Offended by a Book of the Writer's NOW that my page upcloses, doomed, maybe, Never to press thy cosy cushions more, Or wake thy ready Yeas as heretofore, Or stir thy gentle vows of faith in me:

Knowing thy natural receptivity, I figure that, as flambeaux banish eve, My sombre image, warped by insidious heave Of those less forthright, must lose place in thee.

Thomas Hardy

So be it. I have borne such. Let thy dreams Of me and mine diminish day by day, And yield their space to shine of smugger things; Till I shape to thee but in fitful gleams, And then in far and feeble visitings, And then surcease. Truth will be truth alway.

302

To An Orphan Child A Whimsey AH, child, thou art but half thy darling mother's; Hers couldst thou wholly be, My light in thee would outglow all in others; She would relive to me. But niggard Nature's trick of birth Bars, lest she overjoy, Renewal of the loved on earth Save with alloy. The Dame has no regard, alas, my maiden, For love and loss like mine-No sympathy with mind-sight memory-laden; Only with fickle eyne. To her mechanic artistry My dreams are all unknown, And why I wish that thou couldst be But One's alone!

Thomas Hardy

303

To an Unborn Pauper Child Breathe not, hid Heart: cease silently, And though thy birth-hour beckons thee, Sleep the long sleep: The Doomsters heap Travails and teens around us here, And Time-Wraiths turn our songsingings to fear.

Hark, how the peoples surge and sigh, And laughters fail, and greetings die; Hopes dwindle; yea, Faiths waste away, Affections and enthusiasms numb: Thou canst not mend these things if thou dost come. Had I the ear of wombed souls Ere their terrestrial chart unrolls, And thou wert free To cease, or be, Then would I tell thee all I know, And put it to thee: Wilt thou take Life so?

Vain vow! No hint of mine may hence To theeward fly: to thy locked sense Explain none can Life's pending plan: Thou wilt thy ignorant entry make Though skies spout fire and blood and nations quake. Fain would I, dear, find some shut plot Of earth's wide wold for thee, where not One tear, one qualm, Should break the calm. But I am weak as thou and bare; No man can change the common lot to rare. Must come and bide. And such are we -Unreasoning, sanguine, visionary -That I can hope Health, love, friends, scope In full for thee; can dream thou'lt find Joys seldom yet attained by humankind! Thomas Hardy

304

To Flowers From Italy in Winter Sunned in the South, and here to-day; --If all organic things Be sentient, Flowers, as some men say, What are your ponderings? How can you stay, nor vanish quite From this bleak spot of thorn, And birch, and fir, and frozen white Expanse of the forlorn?

Frail luckless exiles hither brought! Your dust will not regain Old sunny haunts of Classic thought When you shall waste and wane; But mix with alien earth, be lit With frigid Boreal flame, And not a sign remain in it To tell men whence you came. Thomas Hardy

305

To Life O life with the sad seared face, I weary of seeing thee, And thy draggled cloak, and thy hobbling pace, And thy too-forced pleasantry! I know what thou would'st tell Of Death, Time, Destiny I have known it long, and know, too, well What it all means for me. But canst thou not array Thyself in rare disguise, And feign like truth, for one mad day, That Earth is Paradise? I'll tune me to the mood, And mumm with thee till eve; And maybe what as interlude I feign, I shall believe! Thomas Hardy

306

To Lizbie Browne I Dear Lizbie Browne, Where are you now? In sun, in rain? Or is your brow Past joy, past pain, Dear Lizbie Browne? II Sweet Lizbie Browne How you could smile, How you could sing! How archly wile In glance-giving, Sweet Lizbie Browne! III And, Lizbie Browne, Who else had hair Bay-red as yours, Or flesh so fair Bred out of doors, Sweet Lizbie Browne? IV When, Lizbie Browne, You had just begun To be endeared By stealth to one, You disappeared My Lizbie Browne! V Ay, Lizbie Browne, So swift your life, And mine so slow, You were a wife Ere I could show Love, Lizbie Browne. VI Still, Lizbie Browne, You won, they said, The best of men When you were wed . . . Where went you then,

307

O Lizbie Browne? VII Dear Lizbie Browne, I should have thought, "Girls ripen fast," And coaxed and caught You ere you passed, Dear Lizbie Browne! VIII But, Lizbie Browne, I let you slip; Shaped not a sign; Touched never your lip With lip of mine, Lost Lizbie Browne! IX So, Lizbie Browne, When on a day Men speak of me As not, you'll say, "And who was he?" Yes, Lizbie Browne! Thomas Hardy

308

To Outer Nature SHOW thee as I thought thee When I early sought thee, Omen-scouting, All undoubting Love alone had wrought thee-Wrought thee for my pleasure, Planned thee as a measure For expounding And resounding Glad things that men treasure. O for but a moment Of that old endowment-Light to gaily See thy daily Irisèd embowment!

But such readorning Time forbids with scorning-Makes me see things Cease to be things They were in my morning. Fad'st thou, glow-forsaken, Darkness-overtaken! Thy first sweetness, Radiance, meetness, None shall reawaken. Why not sempiternal Thou and I? Our vernal Brightness keeping, Time outleaping; Passed the hodiernal!

Thomas Hardy

309

Transformations Portion of this yew Is a man my grandsire knew, Bosomed here at its foot: This branch may be his wife, A ruddy human life Now turned to a green shoot. These grasses must be made Of her who often prayed, Last century, for repose; And the fair girl long ago Whom I often tried to know May be entering this rose.

So, they are not underground, But as nerves and veins abound In the growths of upper air, And they feel the sun and rain, And the energy again That made them what they were! Thomas Hardy

310

Under the Waterfall 'Whenever I plunge my arm, like this, In a basin of water, I never miss The sweet sharp sense of a fugitive day Fetched back from its thickening shroud of gray. Hence the only prime And real love-rhyme That I know by heart, And that leaves no smart, Is the purl of a little valley fall About three spans wide and two spans tall Over a table of solid rock, And into a scoop of the self-same block; The purl of a runlet that never ceases In stir of kingdoms, in wars, in peaces; With a hollow boiling voice it speaks And has spoken since hills were turfless peaks.' 'And why gives this the only prime Idea to you of a real love-rhyme? And why does plunging your arm in a bowl Full of spring water, bring throbs to your soul?'

'Well, under the fall, in a crease of the stone, Though precisely where none ever has known, Jammed darkly, nothing to show how prized, And by now with its smoothness opalized, Is a grinking glass: For, down that pass My lover and I Walked under a sky Of blue with a leaf-wove awning of green, In the burn of August, to paint the scene, And we placed our basket of fruit and wine By the runlet's rim, where we sat to dine; And when we had drunk from the glass together, Arched by the oak-copse from the weather, I held the vessel to rinse in the fall, Where it slipped, and it sank, and was past recall, Though we stooped and plumbed the little abyss With long bared arms. There the glass still is. And, as said, if I thrust my arm below Cold water in a basin or bowl, a throe From the past awakens a sense of that time, And the glass we used, and the cascade's rhyme. The basin seems the pool, and its edge The hard smooth face of the brook-side ledge, And the leafy pattern of china-ware The hanging plants that were bathing there. 'By night, by day, when it shines or lours, There lies intact that chalice of ours, And its presence adds to the rhyme of love

311

Persistently sung by the fall above. No lip has touched it since his and mine In turns therefrom sipped lovers' wine.' Thomas Hardy

312

Unknowing WHEN, soul in soul reflected, We breathed an æthered air, When we neglected All things elsewhere, And left the friendly friendless To keep our love aglow, We deemed it endless... --We did not know!

When, by mad passion goaded, We planned to hie away, But, unforeboded, The storm-shafts gray So heavily down-pattered That none could forthward go, Our lives seemed shattered... --We did not know!

When I found you, helpless lying, And you waived my deep misprise, And swore me, dying, In phantom-guise To wing to me when grieving, And touch away my woe, We kissed, believing... --We did not know!

Thomas Hardy

But though, your powers outreckoning, You hold you dead and dumb, Or scorn my beckoning, And will not come; And I say, "'Twere mood ungainly To store her memory so:" I say it vainly-I feel and know!

313

V.R. 1819-1901 (A Reverie.) Moments the mightiest pass calendared, And when the Absolute In backward Time outgave the deedful word Whereby all life is stirred: "Let one be born and throned whose mould shall constitute The norm of every royal-reckoned attribute," No mortal knew or heard. But in due days the purposed Life outshone Serene, sagacious, free; --Her waxing seasons bloomed with deeds well done, And the world's heart was won . . . Yet may the deed of hers most bright in eyes to be Lie hid from ours--as in the All-One's thought lay she Till ripening years have run. Thomas Hardy

314

V.R. 1819-1901, A Reverie Moments the mightiest pass uncalendared, And when the Absolute In backward Time outgave the deedful word Whereby all life is stirred: "Let one be born and throned whose mould shall constitute The norm of every royal-reckoned attribute," No mortal knew or heard. But in due days the purposed Life outshone Serene, sagacious, free; --Her waxing seasons bloomed with deeds well done, And the world's heart was won . . . Yet may the deed of hers most bright in eyes to be Lie hid from ours--as in the All-One's thought lay she Till ripening years have run. Thomas Hardy

315

Valenciennes By Corporal Tullidge. See "The Trumpet-Major" In Memory of S. C. (Pensioner). Died 184WE trenched, we trumpeted and drummed, And from our mortars tons of iron hummed Ath'art the ditch, the month we bombed The Town o' Valencieën.

'Twas in the June o' Ninety-dree (The Duke o' Yark our then Commander beën) The German Legion, Guards, and we Laid siege to Valencieën.

This was the first time in the war That French and English spilled each other's gore; --God knows what year will end the roar Begun at Valencieën! 'Twas said that we'd no business there A-topperèn the French for disagreën; However, that's not my affair-We were at Valencieën.

Such snocks and slats, since war began Never knew raw recruit or veteràn: Stone-deaf therence went many a man Who served at Valencieën.

Into the streets, ath'art the sky, A hundred thousand balls and bombs were fleën; And harmless townsfolk fell to die Each hour at Valencieën! And, sweatèn wi' the bombardiers, A shell was slent to shards anighst my ears: --'Twas night the end of hopes and fears For me at Valencieën!

They bore my wownded frame to camp, And shut my gapèn skull, and washed en cleän, And jined en wi' a zilver clamp Thik night at Valencieën. "We've fetched en back to quick from dead; But never more on earth while rose is red Will drum rouse Corpel!" Doctor said O' me at Valencieën. 'Twer true. No voice o' friend or foe Can reach me now, or any liveèn beën; And little have I power to know Since then at Valencieën!

316

I never hear the zummer hums O' bees; and don't know when the cuckoo comes; But night and day I hear the bombs We threw at Valencieën....

As for the Duke o' Yark in war, There be some volk whose judgment o' en is meän; But this I say--'a was not far From great at Valencieën.

O' wild wet nights, when all seems sad, My wownds come back, as though new wownds I'd had; But yet--at times I'm sort o' glad I fout at Valencieën. Well: Heaven wi' its jasper halls Is now the on'y Town I care to be in.... Good Lord, if Nick should bomb the walls As we did Valencieën!

Thomas Hardy

317

Weathers This is the weather the cuckoo likes, And so do I; When showers betumble the chestnut spikes, And nestlings fly; And the little brown nightingale bills his best, And they sit outside at 'The Traveller's Rest,' And maids come forth sprig-muslin drest, And citizens dream of the south and west, And so do I. This is the weather the shepherd shuns, And so do I; When beeches drip in browns and duns, And thresh and ply; And hill-hid tides throb, throe on throe, And meadow rivulets overflow, And drops on gate bars hang in a row, And rooks in families homeward go, And so do I. Thomas Hardy

318

When I Set Out for Lyonnesse When I set out for Lyonnesse, A hundred miles away, The rime was on the spray, And starlight lit my lonesomeness When I set out for Lyonnesse A hundred miles away.

What would bechance at Lyonnesse While I should sojourn there No prophet durst declare, Nor did the wisest wizard guess What would bechance at Lyonnesse While I should sojourn there. When I came back from Lyonnesse With magic in my eyes, All marked with mute surmise My radiance rare and fathomless, When I came back from Lyonnesse With magic in my eyes! Thomas Hardy

319

Winter in Durnover Field Scene.--A wide stretch of fallow ground recently sown with wheat, and frozen to iron hardness. Three large birds walking about thereon, and wistfully eyeing the surface. Wind keen from north-east: sky a dull grey. (Triolet) Rook.--Throughout the field I find no grain; The cruel frost encrusts the cornland! Starling.--Aye: patient pecking now is vain Throughout the field, I find . . . Rook.--No grain! Pigeon.--Nor will be, comrade, till it rain, Or genial thawings loose the lorn land Throughout the field. Rook.--I find no grain: The cruel frost encrusts the cornland! Thomas Hardy

320

Wives in the Sere I Never a careworn wife but shows, If a joy suffuse her, Something beautiful to those Patient to peruse her, Some one charm the world unknows Precious to a muser, Haply what, ere years were foes, Moved her mate to choose her. II But, be it a hint of rose That an instant hues her, Or some early light or pose Wherewith thought renews her Seen by him at full, ere woes Practised to abuse her Sparely comes it, swiftly goes, Time again subdues her. Thomas Hardy

321

Zermat: To the Matterhorn (June-July, 1897) Thirty-two years since, up against the sun, Seven shapes, thin atomies to lower sight, Labouringly leapt and gained thy gabled height, And four lives paid for what the seven had won.

They were the first by whom the deed was done, And when I look at thee, my mind takes flight To that day's tragic feat of manly might, As though, till then, of history thou hadst none.

Yet ages ere men topped thee, late and soon Thou watch'dst each night the planets lift and lower; Thou gleam'dst to Joshua's pausing sun and moon, And brav'dst the tokening sky when Caesar's power Approached its bloody end: yea, saw'st that Noon When darkness filled the earth till the ninth hour. Thomas Hardy

322

Zermatt to the Matterhorn. Thirty-two years since, up against the sun, Seven shapes, thin atomies to lower sight, Labouringly leapt and gained thy gabled height, And four lives paid for what the seven had won.

They were the first by whom the deed was done, And when I look at thee, my mind takes flight To that day's tragic feat of manly might, As though, till then, of history thou hadst none.

Yet ages ere men topped thee, late and soon Thou watch'dst each night the planets lift and lower; Thou gleam'dst to Joshua's pausing sun and moon, And brav'dst the tokening sky when Caesar's power Approached its bloody end: yea, saw'st that Noon When darkness filled the earth till the ninth hour. Thomas Hardy